[Page 1]
Published as a conference paper at COLM 2025
AIOS: LLM Agent Operating System
Kai Mei, Xi Zhu, Wujiang Xu, Mingyu Jin, Wenyue Hua, Zelong Li
Shuyuan Xu, Ruosong Ye, Yingqiang Ge, Yongfeng Zhang
Department of Computer Science, Rutgers University∗
Abstract
LLM-based intelligent agents face significant deployment challenges, par-
ticularly related to resource management. Allowing unrestricted access to
LLM or tool resources can lead to inefficient or even potentially harmful
resource allocation and utilization for agents. Furthermore, the absence of
proper scheduling and resource management mechanisms in current agent
designs hinders concurrent processing and limits overall system efficiency.
To address these challenges, this paper proposes the architecture of AIOS
(LLM-based AI Agent Operating System) under the context of managing
LLM-based agents. It introduces a novel architecture for serving LLM-
based agents by isolating resources and LLM-specific services from agent
applications into an AIOS kernel. This AIOS kernel provides fundamental
services (e.g., scheduling, context management, memory management, stor-
age management, access control) for runtime agents. To enhance usability,
AIOS also includes an AIOS SDK, a comprehensive suite of APIs designed
for utilizing functionalities provided by the AIOS kernel. Experimental
results demonstrate that using AIOS can achieve up to 2.1× faster execution
for serving agents built by various agent frameworks. The source code is
available at https://github.com/agiresearch/AIOS.
1 Introduction
In the field of autonomous agents, research efforts (Wooldridge & Jennings, 1995; Jennings
et al., 1998; Bresciani et al., 2004) are made towards agents that can perceive environments,
understand instructions, make decisions, take action and learn from feedbacks. The advent
of large language models (LLMs) (Achiam et al., 2023; Touvron et al., 2023a; Team et al.,
2023) has brought new possibilities to the agent development Ge et al. (2023a). Current
LLMs have shown great power in understanding instructions (Ouyang et al., 2022; Chung
et al., 2022; Touvron et al., 2023b; Geng et al., 2022), reasoning and solving problems (Kojima
et al., 2022; Nijkamp et al., 2022; Taylor et al., 2022; Hao et al., 2023; Kim et al., 2023), and
interacting with human users (Ross et al., 2023) as well as external environments (Driess
et al., 2023; Brohan et al., 2023). Built upon these powerful LLMs, emergent LLM-based
agents (Ge et al., 2023a; Yao et al., 2023; Shinn et al., 2023; Deng et al., 2023; Packer et al., 2023;
Wu et al., 2024) can present strong task fulfillment abilities in diverse environments, ranging
from virtual assistants to more sophisticated reasoning and problem-solving systems.
An illustrative example of an LLM-based agent’s real-world task execution is demon-
strated in Figure 1, where a travel agent processes a trip organization request. The agent
methodically decomposes this request into executable steps—booking flights, reserving
accommodations, processing payments, and updating calendars according to user prefer-
ences. Throughout execution, the agent exhibits reasoning and decision-making capabilities
derived from its LLM foundation, distinguishing it from traditional applications constrained
by predetermined functions or workflows. Implementing this travel scenario requires the
agent to seamlessly integrate LLM-related services (preference retrieval, API selection,
response generation) with conventional OS services (disk access, software execution).
Current agent frameworks exhibit critical design limitations by granting agents direct
access to system-level resources like LLMs and tools (Qin et al., 2024), compromising
∗Author Emails: {kai.mei, xi.zhu, wujiang.xu, mingyu.jin, wenyue.hua, zelong.li, shuyuan.xu,
ruosong.ye, yingqiang.ge, yongfeng.zhang}@rutgers.edu
1
arXiv:2403.16971v5  [cs.OS]  12 Aug 2025

---PAGE BREAK---

[Page 2]
Published as a conference paper at COLM 2025
Travel Agent: Understood. I’ll plan and book your itinerary according to your previous preferences.User: I'm flying from San Francisco to New York for business next month, please help organize the trip.
Preference RetrievalFlight and hotel RecommendationPhoto ID UploadSeat SelectionAdd Ticket to CalendarPayment ProcessingReviews and tips
LLM Storage(managed by LLM)Tool API(managed by LLM)Disk Storage (managed by OS) Software(managed by OS)Tool API(managed by LLM) Software(managed by OS)Text Generation(managed by LLM)
1Step2Step3Step4Step5Step6Step7Step
Figure 1: A motivating example of how an agent (i.e., travel agent) requires both LLM-
related and Non-LLM-related (i.e., OS) services to complete a task, where color in red
represents services related to LLM and color in blue represents services not related to LLM.
resource optimization and introducing potential vulnerabilities. Without proper scheduling,
agents can monopolize resources such as flooding the LLM with requests while others wait.
The absence of effective resource management mechanisms significantly impairs system
efficiency. Under concurrent conditions, existing frameworks (e.g., Autogen, Langchain)
employ an inefficient trial-and-error approach for LLM calls: prompts are converted to
tensors and loaded into GPU memory until CUDA memory limits trigger exceptions, forcing
tensor deallocation and requiring multiple retry attempts, which substantially degrades
system throughput in scenarios where numerous agents compete for limited LLM resources.
To mitigate above-mentioned limitations, we introduce AIOS, an architecture designed to
serve LLM-based agents more efficiently. Our contributions are as below.
◦ New Agent-serving Architecture. We introduce AIOS, a novel LLM-based agent serving ar-
chitecture. AIOS divides agent applications and resources for agents such as LLMs and tools
into distinct layers, i.e., the application layer and the kernel layer. This separation facilitates
systematic resource management, efficiency optimization, and safety enhancement.
◦ AIOS Kernel Design and Implementation. At the core of AIOS, we design and implement
an AIOS kernel to encapsulate resource management abstractions. In this kernel, agent
queries are decomposed into sub execution units (i.e., AIOS syscalls) to facilitate parallelism.
We design an agent scheduler to orchestrate syscall execution across modules, while memory,
storage, and tool managers and the LLM core are responsible for handling dispatched
syscalls. We also design the context manager to handle context interruption and design the
access manager to verify agent operations to ensure the reliability of the AIOS kernel.
◦ AIOS SDK Development. We develop the AIOS SDK, which provides a higher level
abstraction of kernel functionalities, allowing developers to focus on application logic and
higher-level functionalities without being burdened by complicated kernel details.
◦ Empirical Results. We conduct extensive evaluations of AIOS on agents developed using
various agent frameworks. The results demonstrate that AIOS can maintain the perfor-
mance of agents across standard agent benchmarks and can even enhance performance in
benchmarks that involve tool calling. Furthermore, AIOS significantly improves execution
efficiency, achieving up to a 2.1 × increase in execution speed for serving agents across
different frameworks. These experimental results underscore the effectiveness of AIOS in
optimizing both agent performance and execution speed in serving agents.
2 The Architecture of AIOS
As depicted in Figure 2, the AIOS architecture is divided into three distinct layers: the
application, kernel, and hardware layers. This layered design is intended to establish
a clear separation of concerns within the system. Higher-level applications abstract the
complexities of the underlying layers, interacting with them through well-defined interfaces
such as software development kits (SDKs) and system calls.
Application Layer. The application layer leverages the AIOS SDK, providing interfaces
for requesting system resources within AIOS. This design relieves agents from resource
management while enforcing isolation by preventing direct resource manipulation. The
AIOS SDK supports both native agent development and non-native agents adapted from
2

---PAGE BREAK---

[Page 3]
Published as a conference paper at COLM 2025
Keyboard/MouseNetwork Request
AgentApplication
Hardware
Context ManagerAgent SchedulerStorage Manager
AIOS System Call
AIOS-Agent SDK
OS System Call
Memory ManagerProcess Scheduler
FilesystemHardware Driver
OS KernelAIOS Kernel
Tool ManagerAccess Manager
Rec AgentTravel AgentCoding Agent
CPUGPUMemoryPeripheral Devices
Application LayerKernel Layer
Hardware Layer
Math AgentNarrative Agent
Memory Manager
Disk
Non-LLM Related QueriesLLM Related Queries
LLMCore(s)
File Operation Reasoning & PlanningTool ParsingCode Generation
Figure 2: An overview of the AIOS architecture of distinct layers. Application layer facilitates
the design and development of agent applications. Kernel layer manages core functionalities
and resources to serve agent applications. Hardware layer controls and manages physical
computing resources and devices to support kernel layer functionalities.
diverse frameworks including ReAct (Yao et al., 2023), Reflexion (Shinn et al., 2023), Autogen
(Wu et al., 2023), Open-Interpreter (Lucas, 2024), and MetaGPT (Hong et al., 2023). Non-
native agents interact with AIOS kernel resources through adapter functions, while native
development is streamlined via pre-defined APIs that invoke system calls. This abstraction
allows developers to focus on agent logic rather than resource management details.
Kernel Layer. The kernel layer integrates two components: the traditional OS kernel
for non-LLM computing tasks and our innovative AIOS kernel. Within the AIOS kernel,
specialized modules process agent requests through system calls. A scheduler dispatches
these calls to appropriate modules using advanced scheduling strategies (detailed in Section
3.3). We design a unified interface encapsulating LLMs as cores, akin to CPU cores, enabling
integration of diverse LLM endpoints. To support LLM context switching, we implement a
context manager with snapshot and restoration capabilities (Section 3.4). For efficient agent
data handling, we develop a memory manager for runtime operations (Section 3.5) and
a storage manager for persistent storage (Section 3.6). Additionally, a tool manager loads
tools and resolves call conflicts for AIOS SDK supported tools (Section 3.7), while an access
manager implements access control and user intervention protocols (Section 3.8).
Hardware Layer. The hardware layer consists of the physical components of the system,
such as the CPU, GPU, memory, disk, and peripheral devices. The hardware layer is not
the main focus of the work—AIOS kernel does not directly interact with the hardware but
relies on OS system calls to access the physical resources in the hardware layer.
3 AIOS Kernel
In this section, we start with an overview of the AIOS kernel, highlighting how each module
collaborates with other modules to support integrated functionalities. Following this, we
provide an in-depth look into the design and implementation of each module, discussing
their roles and contributions to the overall AIOS architecture.
3.1 Relationship and Connection between Modules
Within the AIOS kernel, agent queries are decomposed into categorized system calls (LLM
processing, memory access, storage operations, tool usage) as shown in Figure 3, with a
comprehensive syscall catalog available in Appendix A.1. Each syscall is thread-bound
and dispatched by the scheduler, which centralizes queue management across all modules.
Syscalls are routed to appropriate module queues based on their attribute sets, with each
3

---PAGE BREAK---

[Page 4]
Published as a conference paper at COLM 2025
LLM Core(s) Storage ManagerTool ManagerMemory ManagerScheduler
C2.2Tool QueueF3.2
A1.2Memory QueueD2.2
Agent QueriesContent: {xxx}Type: ChatContent: {xxx}Type: File OperationContent: {xxx}Type: Tool UseContent: {xxx}Type: ChatContent: {xxx}Type: File OperationContent: {xxx}Type: Tool UseQuery Decomposition
Thread Binding
In-processingsystem callExecution chain
AIOS Kernel
Query A1Query B1Query C2Query D2Query E3Query F3
A1.1 LLM SyscallA1.2 Memory Syscall
B1.1 LLM SyscallB1.2 Storage SyscallB1.3 Memory Syscall
C2.1 LLM SyscallC2.2 Tool SyscallC2.3 Memory Syscall
D2.1 LLM SyscallE3.1 LLM SyscallE3.2 Storage SyscallE3.3 Memory Syscall
F3.1 LLM SyscallF3.2 Tool SyscallF3.3 Memory SyscallD2.2 Memory Syscall
AIOS System Call
Context ManagerE3.1LLM QueueB1.2Storage Queue
Figure 3: How agent queries are decomposed into AIOS system calls and how AIOS system
calls are dispatched and scheduled. We omit the access manager module here as the access-
related system calls will not be dispatched by the scheduler.
module monitoring its designated queue for scheduled calls. Context manager will be
triggered within LLM core for handling context interruptions instead of being scheduled.
3.2 LLM Core
Due to the various deployment options of LLMs, e.g., which LLM is used, whether the
LLM is hosted on cloud or on local device, what hardware conditions the LLM requires, or
which inference framework is used, we encapsulate each LLM instance adopting different
deployment options as a core, akin to a CPU core in a traditional operating system. This
design allows us to treat each LLM instance as a dedicated processing unit, enhancing the
modularity and extensibility within the AIOS architecture. To accommodate different LLM
instances, we introduce a wrapper for each LLM instance and design unified system calls
within this wrapper specifically for LLM inference. By abstracting an LLM instance as a
core and implementing standardized system calls, AIOS provides a flexible way to integrate
LLM instances under different deployment options, attributed to the modular design of the
LLM core. Detailed information of LLM core is provided in Appendix A.2.
3.3 Scheduler
We centralize all queues within the scheduler module rather than distributing them across
processing modules, isolating request management responsibilities and allowing each
module to focus solely on execution. This centralization simplifies cross-module task
coordination and provides a unified scheduling framework. For managing system calls, we
implement two classic algorithms: First-In-First-Out (FIFO), which processes calls in arrival
order but may increase waiting times for later requests, and Round Robin (RR), which cycles
through calls in time-sliced fashion for more balanced resource distribution. The RR strategy
is supported by our context interrupt mechanism for LLM inference, detailed in Section A.3.
3.4 Context Manager
LLM inference time creates bottlenecks through long-running system calls that monopo-
lize resources. Our context interrupt mechanism addresses this via task interruption and
resumption through snapshot and restoration operations. The context manager designs
two approaches: text-based (for closed-source LLMs without logits access, saving decoded
outputs) and logits-based (preserving intermediate search tree structure for finer-grained
state restoration). The logits-based method is illustrated in Figure 4. Using beam search
(common in LLMs (Touvron et al., 2023b; Jiang et al., 2023; Biderman et al., 2023)), with beam
width 1 for simplicity, we demonstrate the process: When processingDetermine whether there
will be rain in the destination of flight UA057, the LLM evaluates candidate tokens at each step.
If suspended by the scheduler mid-generation, the context manager snapshots the interme-
4

---PAGE BREAK---

[Page 5]
Published as a conference paper at COLM 2025
Agentrequest:DeterminewhethertherewillbearaininthedestinationofflightUA057.LLM LLM
Searchweatherin
Retrieve
oftime
/s0.60.40.70.30.80.2
SearchRetrieve/s0.60.4
SearchweatherRetrievetime
/s0.60.40.70.3SearchweatherRetrievetime
/s0.60.40.70.3
Context ManagerSearchweatherin
Retrieve
oftime
/s0.60.40.70.30.80.2
Searchweatherin
Retrieve
oftime
/s0.60.40.70.30.80.2
ParisLondon
Suspended
Snapshot
Restore
SearchweatherinParis
1
2
3
3
4
0.70.3
Figure 4: Illustration of the logits-based context snapshot and restoration process. We use
beam search algorithm where beam width is set to 1 as an example.
diate results. Upon resumption, it reloads this snapshot to continue from the suspension
point, reaching the final answer: Search weather in Paris without restarting computation.
3.5 Memory Manager
Unlike traditional OS memory managers handling physical RAM, AIOS’s memory manager
addresses agent interaction histories during runtime (Lerman & Galstyan, 2003; Zhang et al.,
2024), including conversation logs and tool-calling results. It manages memory structure,
allocation, read/write operations, deletion, and updates. Agent memory resides in RAM by
default, but when allocated space approaches capacity, the manager implements memory
swapping between RAM and disk. When an agent’s memory usage exceeds its block limit
(e.g., 80% of allocation), the memory manager initiates a K-Least Recently Used (LRU-K)
eviction policy, transferring items from RAM to disk via the storage manager (detailed in
Section 3.6). LRU-K prioritizes retaining items in RAM that have been accessed at least K
times recently, while moving less frequently accessed items to disk. This balances memory
efficiency by offloading infrequently accessed data while ensuring retrievability when
needed. Detailed implementations of memory manager are in A.5.
3.6 Storage Manager
The storage manager handles persistent data storage for agents, including files or knowledge
bases that agents depend on to run and the agent memories that need to be persistently
stored. During an agent’s runtime, when the agent’s memory usage exceeds the allocated
limit, the memory manager calls the storage manager to swap the data into the disk.
Specifically, the storage manager reads and writes data based on the agent ID passed from
the memory manager. In addition to the memory manager, the agent itself may also request
to read and write data on disk during runtime, and these agent requests are also handled
by the storage manager. Specifically, the agent calls the storage API in the SDK, which is
further converted into storage-related system calls and put into the storage queue by the
scheduler. The storage manager then processes the requests in the queue to fulfill the agent
requests. The storage manager is implemented using local files and vector database (e.g.,
chromadb). Implementation details of the storage manager are included in Appendix A.6.
3.7 Tool Manager
The tool manager in the AIOS kernel is responsible for managing a broad suite of API tools
supported by the AIOS SDK.
Standardized Tool Loading. The manager employs a standardized interface to handle
diverse tools uniformly, while incorporating parameter validation before execution to
5

---PAGE BREAK---

[Page 6]
Published as a conference paper at COLM 2025
User:Ineedtobuyanewphone.Lookingforsomethingwithagreatcamera,atleast128GBstorage,and5Gcompatible.Budgetisaround$800.Agent:Understood,I’llcallthegooglesearchofrelateditemsforyou.
Interaction History with Agent B (Agent ID=2)
Memory Manager (Short-term)
Agent ID: 1Agent ID: 2Agent ID: n…
Original Interaction HistoryMemoryNoteMemory Limit
LRU-K Eviction
Storage Manager (Long-term)
Agent A
Agent B…
Agent X
Agent C
Figure 5: Illustration of memory and storage manager as well as their relationship. An
agent’s memory item in its memory block will be evicted to storage if its memory usage
exceeds the memory limit, which is set to 80% of the memory block size. This threshold is
configurable through AIOS configuration.
prevent tool crashes. When invoked by name, the tool manager dynamically loads the tool
instance including executables initialization and dependencies verification.
Resolution of Tool Call Conflicts. For tools with parallel access constraints, the system
utilizes a hashmap to monitor real-time instance counts. Request processing involves
hashmap verification against usage and parallel limits; upon detecting conflicts, the system
advances to subsequent queue requests until identifying a conflict-free candidate. The
implementation details are presented in Appendix A.7.
3.8 Access Manager
The access manager in the AIOS kernel provides the following two key functionalities.
Access Control. The access manager regulates cross-agent data read/write operations by
implementing privilege-based access control mechanisms. It assigns each agent to a specific
privilege group and enforces permissions through a hashmap architecture that maps agent
IDs to their corresponding privilege groups. Access requests are validated against this
permission structure before execution, ensuring agents can only access resources of other
agents within their shared privilege domain.
User Intervention. To mitigate risks of irreversible operations (deletion, overwrite, privilege
modification), a user intervention interface is provided for user confirmation. This mandates
explicit user verification before proceeding with potentially destructive operations on files
or tools. Implementation details can be found in Appendix A.8.
3.9 AIOS SDK
We design the AIOS SDK to streamline the development and integration of agents on the
AIOS architecture. This SDK not only empowers developers to build agents that interact
with the core functions in the AIOS kernel but also abstracts complex system calls, allowing
developers to focus on the agent’s internal workflows.
Tool Integration. To support diverse agent functionalities, the AIOS SDK integrates a wide
range of tools sourced from various platforms and supports different cases of input-output
modalities. Detailed information on these integrated tools is provided in Appendix B.3.
Interaction Interface with the AIOS Kernel. To facilitate the utilization of functions
provided by AIOS system calls in the AIOS kernel, the SDK defines different API functions
that agents can use to invoke system calls and request resources.
Agent Framework Adapter. To support agents built with various agent creation frameworks,
such as Autogen (Wu et al., 2023), Open-Interpreter (Lucas, 2024), and MetaGPT (Hong
et al., 2023), the AIOS SDK provides adapters for these frameworks. These adapters locate
6

---PAGE BREAK---

[Page 7]
Published as a conference paper at COLM 2025
Table 1: Evaluation of agent performance on benchmarks w/o and w/ AIOS, respectively.
Success rate (SR%) is used as the metric for all the benchmarks. ”-” represents methods that
failed GAIA benchmark tasks due to lack of API support.
Method HumanEvalMINT (Code) GAIA SWE-Bench-Lite
ReActw/o AIOS 48.8 29.4 5.5 3.9ReActw/ AIOS 50.6 30.1 7.3 4.3
Reflexionw/o AIOS 50.6 32.4 6.7 4.7Reflexionw/ AIOS 51.8 33.8 7.8 5.1
Autogenw/o AIOS 87.8 42.5 7.3 4.3Autogenw/ AIOS 87.8 42.5 9.7 4.3
Open-Interpreterw/o AIOS85.4 45.9 - 4.7Open-Interpreterw/ AIOS 86.0 48.7 - 5.1
MetaGPTw/o AIOS 82.9 41.1 - 5.9MetaGPTw/ AIOS 82.9 41.8 - 5.9
the core functions in the aforementioned frameworks and redirect them to the functions in
AIOS. This adaptation allows agents from different frameworks to operate within the AIOS
environment without modification of the agent code. Further details on the core functions
and specific adaptations for each agent framework are provided in Appendix B.5.
4 Evaluation
In this section, we conduct experiments to answer the following research questions.
• RQ1: Can AIOS maintain or even enhance the performance of agents on standard bench-
marks when running multiple agent instances simultaneously?
• RQ2: How effectively can AIOS optimize system execution throughput and reduce
response latency when serving numerous agents built with different agent frameworks?
• RQ3: How scalable is AIOS as the number of concurrently running agents increases?
4.1 Setup
Models. We use the GPT-4o-mini (Achiam et al., 2023) as the closed-source API, and use
two open-source LLMs, i.e., Llama-3.1-8b (Dubey et al., 2024) and Mistral-7b (Jiang et al.,
2023), as the LLM core, respectively, during the experiments. The open-source models are
both instruction-tuned versions and we use float16 precision.
Hardware. Our experiments are conducted on an Ubuntu 22.04 machine equipped with
NVIDIA RTX A5000 GPUs (24GB). We run all experiments using a single A5000 GPU.
Agent Frameworks. We conduct evaluation by running agents built from various popular
agent frameworks: ReAct (Yao et al., 2023), Reflexion (Shinn et al., 2023), Autogen (Wu et al.,
2023), Open-Interpreter (Lucas, 2024) and MetaGPT (Hong et al., 2023). Details of these
agent frameworks are introduced in Appendix B.5.
Workloads. We evaluate on a resource-constrained scenario in which agents run concur-
rently with a single LLM deployed that can process only one prompt request at a time. To
create these concurrent conditions, we set the maximum number of working threads to 250
by default, i.e., at most 250 agents can run concurrently at the same time. The impact of
increasing the number of agents will be analyzed in Section 4.4. By default, we use RR as
the scheduling strategy for AIOS to run agents. The impact of using other strategy (i.e.,
FIFO) is reported in Appendix D.
4.2 Agent Performance (RQ1)
To evaluate the impact of using AIOS on agent performance in standard benchmarks,
we adopt four agent benchmarks, i.e., HumanEval (Chen et al., 2021a), MINT (the code
subset) (Wang et al., 2023b), GAIA (Mialon et al., 2023) and SWE-Bench-Lite (Jimenez
et al., 2024) to run agents without and with AIOS, respectively. We use the success rate
(SR%) as the metric, consistent with the original benchmarks and use GPT-4o-mini as
the LLM core to run all the agents. We set the temperature as 1.0 for GPT-4o-mini in all
experiments. Detailed descriptions of the benchmark setups and configurations can be
7

---PAGE BREAK---

[Page 8]
Published as a conference paper at COLM 2025
ReAct Reflexion Autogen Open-Interpreter MetaGPT
Agents/Agent Frameworks
0.0
0.5
1.0Throughput (Normalized)
With AIOS Without AIOS
(a) Normalized throughput. Higher is better.
ReAct Reflexion Autogen Open-Interpreter MetaGPT
Agents/Agent Frameworks
0.0
0.5
1.0Latency (Normalized)
With AIOS Without AIOS (b) Normalized latency. Lower is better.
Figure 6: Efficiency analysis on different agent frameworks evaluated on the Llama-3.1-8b
model on the HumanEval benchmark.
ReAct Reflexion Autogen Open-Interpreter MetaGPT
Agents/Agent Frameworks
0.0
0.5
1.0Throughput (Normalized)
With AIOS Without AIOS
(a) Normalized throughput. Higher is better.
ReAct Reflexion Autogen Open-Interpreter MetaGPT
Agents/Agent Frameworks
0.0
0.5
1.0Latency (Normalized)
With AIOS Without AIOS (b) Normalized latency. Lower is better.
Figure 7: Efficiency analysis on different agent frameworks evaluated on the Mistral-7b
model on the HumanEval benchmark.
found in Appendix C. As shown in Table 1, incorporating AIOS consistently maintains
agent performance across standard benchmarks. In some cases, AIOS can also contribute
to agent performance improvements. For example, in code generation benchmarks such
as MINT, HumanEval, and SWE-Bench-Lite, AIOS boosts agent performance by prompt
enhancement, which embeds the system prompts with more structural input and output
within the LLM wrapper. These enhanced prompts provide the LLM with additional context
and structural guidance for response generation. In tool calling benchmarks like GAIA,
agent performance is even boosted by two following mechanisms: pre-execution parameter
validation via structural regex to check the format of tool calls before execution, and (2)
conflict resolution hashmaps to mitigate concurrent access issues.
4.3 Efficiency Analysis (RQ2)
In our efficiency experiments, we evaluate system performance using two key metrics:
throughput and latency. Throughput is measured by counting the number of AIOS system
calls executed per second, indicating the system’s capacity to handle multiple requests in
parallel. Latency, on the other hand, is measured as the average waiting time experienced by
agents, from the moment a query is submitted to the completion of the response, reflecting
the system’s responsiveness. To ensure a controlled and consistent testing environment, we
conduct these evaluations using the two open-source models, Llama-3.1-8b and Mistral-7b,
both hosted locally. Hosting these models locally reduces potential variability in LLM
API response times due to network-related latency issues. As shown in Figure 6a and
Figure 7a, the results demonstrate that AIOS achieves significantly higher throughput across
different agent frameworks, to a 2.1× increase in throughput when using Reflexion-based
agents on Llama-3.1-8b. This improvement is attributed to the scheduling employed in the
AIOS kernel, which prevents unnecessary trial-and-error attempts by avoiding prompts
that cannot be loaded onto the GPU for execution. In terms of latency, as illustrated in
Figure 6b and Figure 7b, the average waiting time for agents is also substantially reduced.
This reduction highlights the efficiency of AIOS in serving LLM-based agents.
4.4 Scalability Analysis (RQ3)
We evaluated AIOS scalability by incrementally increasing active agents from 250 to 2000,
using Llama-3.1-8b and Mistral-7b models on the HumanEval benchmark. We duplicated
HumanEval’s 164 samples to match agent counts, enabling large-scale concurrent execution.
As demonstrated in Figure 8, AIOS maintains approximately linear relationships between
both overall execution time and average agent waiting time relative to agent count. This
indicates that AIOS can efficiently handle workload even under increasing demand. In
contrast, the gap of execution and waiting times between without AIOS and using AIOS
8

---PAGE BREAK---

[Page 9]
Published as a conference paper at COLM 2025
250 500 750 1000 1250 1500 1750 2000
Number of Agents
200
400
600
800
1000Overall Execution Time (seconds)
(a) Overall Execution Time v.s. # Agents
on Mistral-7b with AIOS
on Mistral-7b without AIOS
on Llama-3.1-8b with AIOS
on Llama-3.1-8b without AIOS
250 500 750 1000 1250 1500 1750 2000
Number of Agents
2.5
5.0
7.5
10.0
12.5
15.0
17.5Average Agent Waiting Time (seconds)
(b) Average Agent Waiting Time v.s. # Agents
on Mistral with AIOS
on Mistral without AIOS
on Llama with AIOS
on Llama without AIOS
Figure 8: Overall execution time and average agent waiting time when agent number
increases from 250 to 2000.
widens as agent counts increase. This growing differential underscores AIOS’s scalability
under high concurrent workloads.
5 Related Work
The evolution of operating systems (OS) has progressed from rudimentary to sophisticated
interactive systems. This evolution transitioned from basic batch processing (IBM, 2010) to
advanced process management including time-sharing (Ritchie & Thompson, 1974) and
multi-tasking (Hoare, 1974; Engler et al., 1995), enabling complex task handling. Devel-
opment advanced toward modular architecture with specialized components for process
scheduling (Liu & Layland, 1973; Dijkstra, 2002), memory management (Denning, 1968;
Daley & Dennis, 1968), and filesystem operations (Rosenblum & Ousterhout, 1992; McKu-
sick et al., 1984), improving system efficiency. The introduction of graphical user interfaces
(GUIs) in Macintosh, Windows, and GNOME enhanced user interaction. Currently, AI
models, particularly LLMs, are migrating from application to system layers, providing
standardized services across applications.
Large Language Model Agents are used to solve complex planning and reasoning tasks
(Xie et al., 2024; Ge et al., 2023a). Single agents engage with either digital environment or
physical environment, which may invoke APIs (Ge et al., 2023a; Schick et al., 2023; Yao &
Narasimhan, 2023; Parisi et al., 2022; Tang et al., 2023; Xie et al., 2024), browse websites
(Nakano et al., 2022; Deng et al., 2023; Wu et al., 2024), or execute codes (Zhang et al., 2023;
Yang et al.), while agents in the physical environment may manipulate objects (Brohan
et al., 2023; Fan et al., 2022; Wang et al., 2023a), carry out lab experiments (Boiko et al.,
2023; Bran et al., 2023), or make actionable decisions (Huang et al., 2022; Xiang et al., 2023).
LLM-based multi-agent systems (MAS) leverage the interaction among multiple agents for
problem solving. The relationship among the multiple agents could be cooperative (Wang
et al., 2023c; Mandi et al., 2023), competitive (Chan et al., 2023; Du et al., 2023), or a mixture
of cooperation and competition (Ge et al., 2023b). In cooperative multi-agent systems,
each agent takes and assesses the information provided by other agents, thereby working
together to solve complex tasks, such as role playing (Li et al., 2023; Chen et al., 2023; Zhu
et al., 2023), social simulation (Park et al., 2023) and software development (Hong et al.,
2023; Qian et al., 2023; Wu et al., 2023; Josifoski et al., 2023).
6 Conclusion and Future Work
This paper introduces AIOS, an architecture serving LLM-based agents through an in-
novative kernel that isolates resources and LLM services from agent applications. The
complementary AIOS SDK enables agent applications to leverage kernel functionalities
efficiently. Experimental validation confirms AIOS maintains or enhances agent perfor-
mance on standard benchmarks while significantly accelerating execution time, improving
system throughput, and demonstrating scalability with increasing concurrent agent loads.
9

---PAGE BREAK---

[Page 10]
Published as a conference paper at COLM 2025
We envision this work catalyzing future innovations that refine and expand the architecture
to address evolving requirements for developing and deploying LLM-based agents.
7 Acknowledgement
We thank Balaji Rama, Hang Gao, Shuhang Lin, Jian Zhang and Zhenting Wang for their
valuable discussions and suggestions during the project.
References
Josh Achiam, Steven Adler, Sandhini Agarwal, Lama Ahmad, Ilge Akkaya, Florencia Leoni
Aleman, Diogo Almeida, Janko Altenschmidt, Sam Altman, Shyamal Anadkat, et al.
Gpt-4 technical report. arXiv preprint arXiv:2303.08774, 2023.
Stella Biderman, Hailey Schoelkopf, Quentin Gregory Anthony, Herbie Bradley, Kyle
O’Brien, Eric Hallahan, Mohammad Aflah Khan, Shivanshu Purohit, USVSN Sai
Prashanth, Edward Raff, et al. Pythia: A suite for analyzing large language models
across training and scaling. In International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 2397–2430.
PMLR, 2023.
Daniil A Boiko, Robert MacKnight, and Gabe Gomes. Emergent autonomous scientific
research capabilities of large language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2304.05332, 2023.
Andres M Bran, Sam Cox, Andrew D White, and Philippe Schwaller. Chemcrow: Aug-
menting large-language models with chemistry tools. arXiv preprint arXiv:2304.05376,
2023.
Paolo Bresciani, Anna Perini, Paolo Giorgini, Fausto Giunchiglia, and John Mylopoulos.
Tropos: An agent-oriented software development methodology. Autonomous Agents and
Multi-Agent Systems, 8:203–236, 2004.
Anthony Brohan, Yevgen Chebotar, Chelsea Finn, Karol Hausman, Alexander Herzog,
Daniel Ho, Julian Ibarz, Alex Irpan, Eric Jang, Ryan Julian, et al. Do as i can, not as i say:
Grounding language in robotic affordances. In Conference on robot learning, pp. 287–318.
PMLR, 2023.
Chi-Min Chan, Weize Chen, Yusheng Su, Jianxuan Yu, Wei Xue, Shanghang Zhang, Jie Fu,
and Zhiyuan Liu. Chateval: Towards better llm-based evaluators through multi-agent
debate. In The Twelfth International Conference on Learning Representations, 2023.
Mark Chen, Jerry Tworek, Heewoo Jun, Qiming Yuan, Henrique Ponde de Oliveira Pinto,
Jared Kaplan, Harri Edwards, Yuri Burda, Nicholas Joseph, Greg Brockman, Alex Ray,
Raul Puri, Gretchen Krueger, Michael Petrov, Heidy Khlaaf, Girish Sastry, Pamela Mishkin,
Brooke Chan, Scott Gray, Nick Ryder, Mikhail Pavlov, Alethea Power, Lukasz Kaiser, Mo-
hammad Bavarian, Clemens Winter, Philippe Tillet, Felipe Petroski Such, Dave Cummings,
Matthias Plappert, Fotios Chantzis, Elizabeth Barnes, Ariel Herbert-Voss, William Hebgen
Guss, Alex Nichol, Alex Paino, Nikolas Tezak, Jie Tang, Igor Babuschkin, Suchir Balaji,
Shantanu Jain, William Saunders, Christopher Hesse, Andrew N. Carr, Jan Leike, Josh
Achiam, Vedant Misra, Evan Morikawa, Alec Radford, Matthew Knight, Miles Brundage,
Mira Murati, Katie Mayer, Peter Welinder, Bob McGrew, Dario Amodei, Sam McCandlish,
Ilya Sutskever, and Wojciech Zaremba. Evaluating large language models trained on code.
2021a.
Mark Chen, Jerry Tworek, Heewoo Jun, Qiming Yuan, Henrique Ponde de Oliveira Pinto,
Jared Kaplan, Harri Edwards, Yuri Burda, Nicholas Joseph, Greg Brockman, et al. Evalu-
ating large language models trained on code. arXiv preprint arXiv:2107.03374, 2021b.
Weize Chen, Yusheng Su, Jingwei Zuo, Cheng Yang, Chenfei Yuan, Chen Qian, Chi-Min
Chan, Yujia Qin, Yaxi Lu, Ruobing Xie, et al. Agentverse: Facilitating multi-agent col-
laboration and exploring emergent behaviors in agents. arXiv preprint arXiv:2308.10848,
2023.
10

---PAGE BREAK---

[Page 11]
Published as a conference paper at COLM 2025
Hyung Won Chung, Le Hou, Shayne Longpre, Barret Zoph, Yi Tay, William Fedus, Yunxuan
Li, Xuezhi Wang, Mostafa Dehghani, Siddhartha Brahma, et al. Scaling instruction-
finetuned language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2210.11416, 2022.
Robert C Daley and Jack B Dennis. Virtual memory, processes, and sharing in multics.
Communications of the ACM, 11(5):306–312, 1968.
Xiang Deng, Yu Gu, Boyuan Zheng, Shijie Chen, Samuel Stevens, Boshi Wang, Huan Sun,
and Yu Su. Mind2web: Towards a generalist agent for the web. Advances in Neural
Information Processing Systems, 36, 2023.
Peter J Denning. The working set model for program behavior. Communications of the ACM,
11(5):323–333, 1968.
Edsger W Dijkstra. Cooperating sequential processes. In The origin of concurrent programming:
from semaphores to remote procedure calls, pp. 65–138. Springer, 2002.
Danny Driess, Fei Xia, Mehdi SM Sajjadi, Corey Lynch, Aakanksha Chowdhery, Brian Ichter,
Ayzaan Wahid, Jonathan Tompson, Quan Vuong, Tianhe Yu, et al. Palm-e: an embodied
multimodal language model. In Proceedings of the 40th International Conference on Machine
Learning, pp. 8469–8488, 2023.
Yilun Du, Shuang Li, Antonio Torralba, Joshua B Tenenbaum, and Igor Mordatch. Improving
factuality and reasoning in language models through multiagent debate. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2305.14325, 2023.
Abhimanyu Dubey, Abhinav Jauhri, Abhinav Pandey, Abhishek Kadian, Ahmad Al-Dahle,
Aiesha Letman, Akhil Mathur, Alan Schelten, Amy Yang, Angela Fan, et al. The llama 3
herd of models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2407.21783, 2024.
Dawson R Engler, M Frans Kaashoek, and James O’Toole Jr. Exokernel: An operating system
architecture for application-level resource management. ACM SIGOPS Operating Systems
Review, 29(5):251–266, 1995.
Linxi Fan, Guanzhi Wang, Yunfan Jiang, Ajay Mandlekar, Yuncong Yang, Haoyi Zhu,
Andrew Tang, De-An Huang, Yuke Zhu, and Anima Anandkumar. Minedojo: Build-
ing open-ended embodied agents with internet-scale knowledge. Advances in Neural
Information Processing Systems, 35:18343–18362, 2022.
Yingqiang Ge, Wenyue Hua, Kai Mei, Juntao Tan, Shuyuan Xu, Zelong Li, and Yongfeng
Zhang. OpenAGI: When LLM Meets Domain Experts. Advances in Neural Information
Processing Systems, 36, 2023a.
Yingqiang Ge, Yujie Ren, Wenyue Hua, Shuyuan Xu, Juntao Tan, and Yongfeng Zhang.
LLM as OS, Agents as Apps: Envisioning AIOS, Agents and the AIOS-Agent Ecosystem.
arXiv:2312.03815, 2023b.
Shijie Geng, Shuchang Liu, Zuohui Fu, Yingqiang Ge, and Yongfeng Zhang. Recommen-
dation as language processing (rlp): A unified pretrain, personalized prompt & predict
paradigm (p5). In Proceedings of the 16th ACM Conference on Recommender Systems , pp.
299–315, 2022.
Shibo Hao, Yi Gu, Haodi Ma, Joshua Hong, Zhen Wang, Daisy Wang, and Zhiting Hu.
Reasoning with language model is planning with world model. In Proceedings of the 2023
Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing, pp. 8154–8173, 2023.
Charles Antony Richard Hoare. Monitors: An operating system structuring concept. Com-
munications of the ACM, 17(10):549–557, 1974.
Sirui Hong, Mingchen Zhuge, Jonathan Chen, Xiawu Zheng, Yuheng Cheng, Jinlin Wang,
Ceyao Zhang, Zili Wang, Steven Ka Shing Yau, Zijuan Lin, et al. Metagpt: Meta program-
ming for multi-agent collaborative framework. In The Twelfth International Conference on
Learning Representations, 2023.
11

---PAGE BREAK---

[Page 12]
Published as a conference paper at COLM 2025
Wenlong Huang, Pieter Abbeel, Deepak Pathak, and Igor Mordatch. Language models as
zero-shot planners: Extracting actionable knowledge for embodied agents. In International
Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 9118–9147. PMLR, 2022.
Corporation IBM. What is batch processing? z/OS Concepts, 2010.
Nicholas R Jennings, Katia Sycara, and Michael Wooldridge. A roadmap of agent research
and development. Autonomous agents and multi-agent systems, 1:7–38, 1998.
Albert Q Jiang, Alexandre Sablayrolles, Arthur Mensch, Chris Bamford, Devendra Singh
Chaplot, Diego de las Casas, Florian Bressand, Gianna Lengyel, Guillaume Lample, Lucile
Saulnier, et al. Mistral 7b. arXiv preprint arXiv:2310.06825, 2023.
Carlos E Jimenez, John Yang, Alexander Wettig, Shunyu Yao, Kexin Pei, Ofir Press, and
Karthik R Narasimhan. SWE-bench: Can language models resolve real-world github
issues? In The Twelfth International Conference on Learning Representations, 2024.
Martin Josifoski, Lars Klein, Maxime Peyrard, Yifei Li, Saibo Geng, Julian Paul Schnitzler,
Yuxing Yao, Jiheng Wei, Debjit Paul, and Robert West. Flows: Building blocks of reasoning
and collaborating ai. arXiv preprint arXiv:2308.01285, 2023.
Geunwoo Kim, Pierre Baldi, and Stephen McAleer. Language models can solve computer
tasks. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 36, 2023.
Takeshi Kojima, Shixiang Shane Gu, Machel Reid, Yutaka Matsuo, and Yusuke Iwasawa.
Large language models are zero-shot reasoners. Advances in neural information processing
systems, 35:22199–22213, 2022.
Kristina Lerman and Aram Galstyan. Agent memory and adaptation in multi-agent systems.
In Proceedings of the second international joint conference on Autonomous agents and multiagent
systems, pp. 797–803, 2003.
Guohao Li, Hasan Hammoud, Hani Itani, Dmitrii Khizbullin, and Bernard Ghanem. Camel:
Communicative agents for ”mind” exploration of large language model society. Advances
in Neural Information Processing Systems, 36, 2023.
Chung Laung Liu and James W Layland. Scheduling algorithms for multiprogramming in
a hard-real-time environment. Journal of the ACM (JACM), 20(1):46–61, 1973.
Killian Lucas. Open interpreter. https://github.com/OpenInterpreter/open-interpreter,
2024.
Zhao Mandi, Shreeya Jain, and Shuran Song. Roco: Dialectic multi-robot collaboration with
large language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2307.04738, 2023.
Marshall K McKusick, William N Joy, Samuel J Leffler, and Robert S Fabry. A fast file system
for unix. ACM Transactions on Computer Systems (TOCS), 2(3):181–197, 1984.
Gr´egoire Mialon, Cl´ementine Fourrier, Craig Swift, Thomas Wolf, Yann LeCun, and Thomas
Scialom. Gaia: a benchmark for general ai assistants. arXiv preprint arXiv:2311.12983,
2023.
Reiichiro Nakano, Jacob Hilton, Suchir Balaji, Jeff Wu, Long Ouyang, Christina Kim, Christo-
pher Hesse, Shantanu Jain, Vineet Kosaraju, William Saunders, Xu Jiang, Karl Cobbe,
Tyna Eloundou, Gretchen Krueger, Kevin Button, Matthew Knight, Benjamin Chess, and
John Schulman. Webgpt: Browser-assisted question-answering with human feedback,
2022.
Erik Nijkamp, Bo Pang, Hiroaki Hayashi, Lifu Tu, Huan Wang, Yingbo Zhou, Silvio Savarese,
and Caiming Xiong. Codegen: An open large language model for code with multi-turn
program synthesis. arXiv preprint arXiv:2203.13474, 2022.
12

---PAGE BREAK---

[Page 13]
Published as a conference paper at COLM 2025
Long Ouyang, Jeffrey Wu, Xu Jiang, Diogo Almeida, Carroll Wainwright, Pamela Mishkin,
Chong Zhang, Sandhini Agarwal, Katarina Slama, Alex Ray, et al. Training language
models to follow instructions with human feedback. Advances in Neural Information
Processing Systems, 35:27730–27744, 2022.
Charles Packer, Vivian Fang, Shishir G Patil, Kevin Lin, Sarah Wooders, and Joseph E
Gonzalez. Memgpt: Towards llms as operating systems. arXiv preprint arXiv:2310.08560,
2023.
Kishore Papineni, Salim Roukos, Todd Ward, and Wei-Jing Zhu. Bleu: a method for
automatic evaluation of machine translation. In Proceedings of the 40th annual meeting of
the Association for Computational Linguistics, pp. 311–318, 2002.
Aaron Parisi, Yao Zhao, and Noah Fiedel. Talm: Tool augmented language models. arXiv
preprint arXiv:2205.12255, 2022.
Joon Sung Park, Joseph O’Brien, Carrie Jun Cai, Meredith Ringel Morris, Percy Liang, and
Michael S Bernstein. Generative agents: Interactive simulacra of human behavior. In
Proceedings of the 36th Annual ACM Symposium on User Interface Software and Technology, pp.
1–22, 2023.
Chen Qian, Xin Cong, Cheng Yang, Weize Chen, Yusheng Su, Juyuan Xu, Zhiyuan Liu,
and Maosong Sun. Communicative agents for software development. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2307.07924, 2023.
Yujia Qin, Shihao Liang, Yining Ye, Kunlun Zhu, Lan Yan, Yaxi Lu, Yankai Lin, Xin Cong,
Xiangru Tang, Bill Qian, et al. Toolllm: Facilitating large language models to master
16000+ real-world apis. ICLR, 2024.
Dennis M Ritchie and Ken Thompson. The unix time-sharing system. Communications of the
ACM, 17(7):365–375, 1974.
Mendel Rosenblum and John K Ousterhout. The design and implementation of a log-
structured file system. ACM Transactions on Computer Systems (TOCS), 10(1):26–52, 1992.
Steven I Ross, Fernando Martinez, Stephanie Houde, Michael Muller, and Justin D Weisz.
The programmer’s assistant: Conversational interaction with a large language model for
software development. In Proceedings of the 28th International Conference on Intelligent User
Interfaces, pp. 491–514, 2023.
Timo Schick, Jane Dwivedi-Yu, Roberto Dess `ı, Roberta Raileanu, Maria Lomeli, Luke
Zettlemoyer, Nicola Cancedda, and Thomas Scialom. Toolformer: Language models can
teach themselves to use tools. arXiv preprint arXiv:2302.04761, 2023.
Noah Shinn, Federico Cassano, Ashwin Gopinath, Karthik Narasimhan, and Shunyu Yao.
Reflexion: Language agents with verbal reinforcement learning. Advances in Neural
Information Processing Systems, 36, 2023.
Qiaoyu Tang, Ziliang Deng, Hongyu Lin, Xianpei Han, Qiao Liang, and Le Sun. Toolalpaca:
Generalized tool learning for language models with 3000 simulated cases. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2306.05301, 2023.
Ross Taylor, Marcin Kardas, Guillem Cucurull, Thomas Scialom, Anthony Hartshorn, Elvis
Saravia, Andrew Poulton, Viktor Kerkez, and Robert Stojnic. Galactica: A large language
model for science. arXiv preprint arXiv:2211.09085, 2022.
Gemini Team, Rohan Anil, Sebastian Borgeaud, Yonghui Wu, Jean-Baptiste Alayrac, Jiahui
Yu, Radu Soricut, Johan Schalkwyk, Andrew M Dai, Anja Hauth, et al. Gemini: a family
of highly capable multimodal models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2312.11805, 2023.
Hugo Touvron, Thibaut Lavril, Gautier Izacard, Xavier Martinet, Marie-Anne Lachaux,
Timoth´ee Lacroix, Baptiste Rozi `ere, Naman Goyal, Eric Hambro, Faisal Azhar, et al.
Llama: Open and efficient foundation language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2302.13971,
2023a.
13

---PAGE BREAK---

[Page 14]
Published as a conference paper at COLM 2025
Hugo Touvron, Louis Martin, Kevin Stone, Peter Albert, Amjad Almahairi, Yasmine Babaei,
Nikolay Bashlykov, Soumya Batra, Prajjwal Bhargava, Shruti Bhosale, et al. Llama 2:
Open foundation and fine-tuned chat models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2307.09288, 2023b.
Guanzhi Wang, Yuqi Xie, Yunfan Jiang, Ajay Mandlekar, Chaowei Xiao, Yuke Zhu, Linxi Fan,
and Anima Anandkumar. Voyager: An open-ended embodied agent with large language
models. In Intrinsically-Motivated and Open-Ended Learning Workshop@ NeurIPS2023, 2023a.
Xingyao Wang, Zihan Wang, Jiateng Liu, Yangyi Chen, Lifan Yuan, Hao Peng, and Heng Ji.
Mint: Evaluating llms in multi-turn interaction with tools and language feedback. arXiv
preprint arXiv:2309.10691, 2023b.
Zhenhailong Wang, Shaoguang Mao, Wenshan Wu, Tao Ge, Furu Wei, and Heng Ji. Un-
leashing cognitive synergy in large language models: A task-solving agent through
multi-persona self-collaboration. arXiv preprint arXiv:2307.05300, 1(2):3, 2023c.
Michael Wooldridge and Nicholas R Jennings. Intelligent agents: Theory and practice. The
knowledge engineering review, 10(2):115–152, 1995.
Qingyun Wu, Gagan Bansal, Jieyu Zhang, Yiran Wu, Shaokun Zhang, Erkang Zhu, Beibin
Li, Li Jiang, Xiaoyun Zhang, and Chi Wang. Autogen: Enabling next-gen llm applications
via multi-agent conversation framework. arXiv preprint arXiv:2308.08155, 2023.
Zhiyong Wu, Chengcheng Han, Zichen Ding, Zhenmin Weng, Zhoumianze Liu, Shunyu
Yao, Tao Yu, and Lingpeng Kong. Os-copilot: Towards generalist computer agents with
self-improvement. arXiv preprint arXiv:2402.07456, 2024.
Jiannan Xiang, Tianhua Tao, Yi Gu, Tianmin Shu, Zirui Wang, Zichao Yang, and Zhiting Hu.
Language models meet world models: Embodied experiences enhance language models.
Advances in neural information processing systems, 36, 2023.
Jian Xie, Kai Zhang, Jiangjie Chen, Tinghui Zhu, Renze Lou, Yuandong Tian, Yanghua Xiao,
and Yu Su. Travelplanner: A benchmark for real-world planning with language agents.
arXiv preprint arXiv:2402.01622, 2024.
John Yang, Carlos E Jimenez, Alexander Wettig, Kilian Lieret, Shunyu Yao, Karthik
Narasimhan, and Ofir Press. Swe-agent: Agent-computer interfaces enable automated
software engineering.
Shunyu Yao and Karthik Narasimhan. Language agents in the digital world: Opportunities
and risks. princeton-nlp.github.io, 2023.
Shunyu Yao, Jeffrey Zhao, Dian Yu, Nan Du, Izhak Shafran, Karthik Narasimhan, and
Yuan Cao. ReAct: Synergizing reasoning and acting in language models. International
Conference on Learning Representations, 2023.
Kechi Zhang, Ge Li, Jia Li, Zhuo Li, and Zhi Jin. Toolcoder: Teach code generation models
to use apis with search tools. arXiv preprint arXiv:2305.04032, 2023.
Tianyi Zhang, Varsha Kishore, Felix Wu, Kilian Q Weinberger, and Yoav Artzi. Bertscore:
Evaluating text generation with bert. arXiv preprint arXiv:1904.09675, 2019.
Zeyu Zhang, Xiaohe Bo, Chen Ma, Rui Li, Xu Chen, Quanyu Dai, Jieming Zhu, Zhenhua
Dong, and Ji-Rong Wen. A survey on the memory mechanism of large language model
based agents. arXiv preprint arXiv:2404.13501, 2024.
Xizhou Zhu, Yuntao Chen, Hao Tian, Chenxin Tao, Weijie Su, Chenyu Yang, Gao Huang,
Bin Li, Lewei Lu, Xiaogang Wang, et al. Ghost in the minecraft: Generally capable agents
for open-world enviroments via large language models with text-based knowledge and
memory. arXiv preprint arXiv:2305.17144, 2023.
14

---PAGE BREAK---

[Page 15]
Published as a conference paper at COLM 2025
APPENDIX
This appendix contains additional details for this paper. The appendix is organized as:
Section §A provides AIOS Kernel Implementation Details. Section §B reports more about
AIOS SDK. Section §C reports more Details of Agent Benchmarks. Section §D shows more
Additional Experimental Results. Section §E analyzes Discussion.
A AIOS Kernel Implementation Details
A.1 AIOS System Call
The modules in AIOS achieve their functionalities by invoking system calls. Table 2 shows a
more comprehensive list of system calls correspondent to different modules and present the
arguments for invoking these system calls.
Table 2: AIOS modules and their correspondent system calls.
Module System Call
LLM Core execute llm syscall, get model response, process model response
Scheduler execute syscall, start, stop
Context Manager generate response with interruption, load context, clear context
Memory Manager execute memory syscall, add memory, remove memory
update memory, retrieve memory
Storage Manager execute storage syscall, sto create file, sto create directory
sto mount, sto write, sto retrieve, sto rollback, sto share
Tool Manager execute tool syscall, load tool instance
Access Manager add privilege, check access, ask permission
Thread Binding. Each system call within AIOS is bound to a separate thread for execution,
allowing for concurrent processing. The thread binding is implemented by inheriting the
Thread class and overwrites its init and run methods.
class SysCall ( Thread ) :
def __init__ ( self , agent_name , request_data ) :
super () . __init__ ()
self . agent_name = agent_name
self . request_data = request_data
self . event = threading . Event ()
self . pid = None
self . status = None
self . response = None
self . time_limit = None
self . created_time = None
self . start_time = None
self . end_time = None
def run ( self ) :
self . set_pid ( self . native_id )
self . event . wait ()
A.2 LLM Core
AIOS implements a unified interface through the LLMAdapter class, which provides a
consistent function interface for integrating LLM instances from various backends. This
architecture allows for seamless interaction with different LLM providers while maintaining
a standardized API. Table 3 presents the supported LLM backends and their respective
functionalities within the AIOS framework.
15

---PAGE BREAK---

[Page 16]
Published as a conference paper at COLM 2025
Table 3: Adapted LLM backends in AIOS and supported features.
Backend Supported Features in AIOS
Structured Output Function Calling
OpenAI (cloud) ✓ ✓
Anthropic (cloud) ✓ ✓
Google (cloud) ✓ ✓
Groq (cloud) ✓ ✓
Bedrock (cloud) ✓ ✓
Huggingface (local) ✓ ✓
vllm (local) ✓ ✓
Ollama (local) ✓ ✓
class LLMAdapter :
# The LLMAdapter class is an abstraction layer wraps LLM core instances from different LLM
backends .
def __init__ (
self ,
llm_configs : List [ Dict [ str , Any ]] ,
api_key : Optional [ Union [ str , List [ str ]]] = None ,
log_mode : str = " console " ,
u s e _ c o n t e x t _ m a n a g e r : bool = False ,
strategy : Optional [ RouterStrategy ] = RouterStrategy . Sequential ,
) :
# Initialize the LLMAdapter .
def setup_api_keys ( self ) -> None :
# Set up API keys for different providers from config or environment .
pass
def initialize_llms ( self ) -> None :
# Initialize LLM backends based on configurations .
pass
def i n i t i a l i z e _ s i n g l e _ l l m ( self , config : LLMConfig ) -> None :
# Initialize a single LLM based on its configuration .
pass
def h a n d l e _ c o m p l e t i o n _ e r r o r ( self , error : Exception ) -> LLMResponse :
# Handle errors that occur during LLM completion .
pass
def e x e c u t e _ l l m _ s y s c a l l (
self ,
llm_syscall ,
temperature : float = 0.0
) -> LLMResponse :
# Address request sent from the agent .
pass
def g et _ m od e l _r e s po n s e (
self ,
model_name : str ,
model : Union [ str , HfLocalBackend , OpenAI ] ,
messages : List [ Dict ] ,
tools : Optional [ List ] ,
llm_syscall ,
api_base : Optional [ str ] = None ,
m e s s a g e _ r e t u r n _ t y p e : Optional [ str ] = " text " ,
response_format : Optional [ Dict [ str , Dict ]] = None ,
temperature : float = 1.0 ,
max_tokens : int = 1000
) -> Any :
# Get response from the model .
def pro cess_res ponse (
self ,
c om p l et e d _r e s po n s e : str | List , # either a response message of a string or a list of
tool calls
finished : bool ,
tools : Optional [ List ] = None ,
model : Union [ str , OpenAI , HfLocalBackend ] = None ,
m e s s a g e _ r e t u r n _ t y p e : Optional [ str ] = None
) -> LLMResponse :
# Process the model 's response into the appropriate format .
pass
16

---PAGE BREAK---

[Page 17]
Published as a conference paper at COLM 2025
A.3 Scheduler
AIOS implements a flexible scheduler architecture through the BaseScheduler class, which
serves as the foundation for various scheduling strategies. By designing an extensible
inheritance model, specialized schedulers (implementing algorithms such as FIFO, Round
Robin, and priority-based scheduling) can be derived from this base class. This modular
design ensures that new scheduling algorithms can be introduced without modifying
existing implementations, thus maintaining strong isolation between different scheduling
strategies and enhancing the overall system flexibility.
class BaseScheduler :
# Task scheduler implementation .
def __init__ (
self ,
llm : LLMAdapter ,
memory_manager : MemoryManager ,
storage_manager : StorageManager ,
tool_manager : ToolManager ,
log_mode : str ,
get_llm_syscall : LLMRequestQueueGetMessage ,
g et _ m em o r y_ s y sc a l l : MemoryRequestQueueGetMessage ,
g e t _ s t o r a g e _ s y s c a l l : StorageRequestQueueGetMessage ,
get_ tool_sys call : ToolRequestQueueGetMessage ,
) :
# Initialize the Scheduler .
pass
def _ex ecute_sy scall (
self ,
syscall : Any ,
executor : Any ,
syscall_type : str
) -> Optional [ Dict [ str , Any ]]:
# Execute a system call with proper status tracking and error handling .
pass
def p r o c e s s _ l l m _ r e q u e s t s ( self ) -> None :
# Process LLM requests from the queue .
pass
def p r o c e s s _ m e m o r y _ r e q u e s t s ( self ) -> None :
# Process Memory requests from the queue .
pass
def p r o c e s s _ s t o r a g e _ r e q u e s t s ( self ) -> None :
# Process Storage requests from the queue .
pass
def p r o c e s s _ t o o l _ r e q u e s t s ( self ) -> None :
# Process Tool requests from the queue .
pass
def start ( self ) -> None :
# Start all request processing threads .
pass
def stop ( self ) -> None :
# Stop all request processing threads .
pass
A.4 Context Manager
The SimpleContextManager implements an efficient mechanism for managing LLM genera-
tion contexts with time-aware interruption capabilities. This component enables preemptive
multitasking by preserving LLM states across generation phases. When an LLM successfully
begins token generation within its allocated time slice (evidenced by at least one decoded
token), the context manager captures and preserves the intermediate generation state. This
ensures that subsequent resumption can continue from the exact point of interruption,
eliminating redundant computation. This architecture supports various LLM backends
(OpenAI, HuggingFace, and others) through a unified interface while enforcing strict time
boundaries on generation tasks. By managing both streaming responses and enforcing time
limits, the context manager helps improve fairness among different queries to LLMs.
17

---PAGE BREAK---

[Page 18]
Published as a conference paper at COLM 2025
class S i m p l e C o n t e x t M a n a g e r ( Ba s e Co n t ex t M an a g er ) :
"""
A simple context manager for handling LLM context saving and loading .
This class provides functionality to save the current state of an LLM generation ,
load previously saved states , and manage context for different processes .
"""
def __init__ ( self ) :
# Initialize the S i m p l e C o n t e x t M a n a g e r with an empty context dictionary .
pass
def g e t _ s t r e a m i n g _ c o m p l e t i o n _ r e s p o n s e (
self ,
model_or_client : Union [ str , OpenAI ] ,
model_name : str ,
messages : List [ Dict [ str , str ]] ,
tools : Optional [ List [ Dict [ str , Any ]]] ,
temperature : float ,
max_tokens : int ,
response_format : Optional [ Dict [ str , Any ]] = None ,
stream : bool = True
) -> Any :
# Get a completion response from either litellm or OpenAI client .
pass
def p r o c e s s _ c o m p l e t i o n _ s t r e a m i n g _ r e s p o n s e (
self ,
response : Any ,
initial_content : str ,
time_limit : float
) -> Tuple [ str , bool ]:
# Process a streaming response with time limit enforcement .
pass
def _ i s _ h u g g i n g f a c e _ m o d e l ( self , model ) -> bool :
# Check if the model is a HuggingFace model instance .
pass
def g e n e r a t e _ w i t h _ t i m e _ l i m i t _ h f (
self ,
model ,
messages : List [ Dict [ str , str ]] ,
max_tokens : int ,
temperature : float ,
pid : int ,
time_limit : float
) -> Tuple [ str , bool , Dict ]:
# Generate text with a HuggingFace model with time limit enforcement .
pass
def g e n e r a t e _ r e s p o n s e _ w i t h _ i n t e r r u p t i o n ( self ,
model_name : str ,
model : Union [ str , OpenAI , Any ] ,
messages : List [ Dict [ str , str ]] ,
tools : Optional [ List [ Dict [ str , Any ]]] ,
m e s s a g e _ r e t u r n _ t y p e : str ,
temperature : float ,
max_tokens : int ,
pid : Union [ int , str ] ,
time_limit : float ,
response_format : Optional [ Dict [ str , Any ]] = None
) -> Tuple [ Any , bool ]:
# Save the context of an LLM generation . This method handles different types of LLM
models ( string - based , OpenAI client , or HuggingFace ) and different response types
( text , JSON , or tool calls ) . It manages streaming responses and enforces time
limits .
pass
def load_context ( self , pid ) :
# Load a previously saved context for a process .
pass
def clear_context ( self , pid ) :
# Clear the saved context for a process .
pass
18

---PAGE BREAK---

[Page 19]
Published as a conference paper at COLM 2025
A.5 Memory Manager
The memory manager provides RAM-based memory operations for the AIOS system,
handling transient session-specific data that clears when agent sessions end. Built on
the BaseMemoryManager class, it offers comprehensive memory access through atomic
operations, automatic metadata synchronization, and thread-safe access patterns. The
system efficiently processes memory through a complete suite of CRUD operations and
advanced retrieval mechanisms, functioning similarly to pointer management in low-level
programming while ensuring data integrity during concurrent operations.
class B as eMe mo ry Ma na ger :
# This class provides the core functionality for memory operations in the AIOS system ,
including adding , removing , updating , and retrieving memories . It acts as a wrapper
for memory access , similar to working with pointers in low - level languages .
def __init__ ( self , log_mode ) :
# Initialize the Bas eM em or yM ana ge r .
pass
def _ a n a l y z e _ q u e r y _ t o _ m e m o r y ( self , query : MemoryQuery ) -> ' MemoryNote ':
# Convert a MemoryQuery to a MemoryNote object .
pass
def e x e c u t e _ m e m o r y _ s y s c a l l ( self , memory_syscall ) :
# Route a memory syscall to the appropriate method .
pass
def add_memory (
self ,
memory_note
) :
# Add a memory note to the storage .
pass
def remove_memory (
self ,
memory_id
) :
# Remove a memory note from storage .
pass
def update_memory (
self ,
memory_note
) :
# Update an existing memory note .
pass
def get_memory (
self ,
memory_id : str
) -> ' MemoryNote ':
# Retrieve a memory note by ID .
pass
def _ r e t r i e v e _ m e m o r y _ r a w (
self ,
memory_query : MemoryQuery
) :
# Retrieve memories similar to the query content .
pass
def retrieve_memory (
self ,
memory_query : MemoryQuery
) :
# Retrieve memories similar to the query content .
pass
A.6 Storage Manager
The Storage Manager orchestrates persistent data operations in AIOS, combining traditional
file storage with vector database capabilities. It implements versioned file management,
thread-safe access through file-specific locks, and semantic search functionality. The storage
19

---PAGE BREAK---

[Page 20]
Published as a conference paper at COLM 2025
manager provides file operations including file management, semantic file retrieval, version
control with rollback capabilities, and file sharing. Function interfaces are shown as below.
class StorageManager :
"""
Storage manager provides versioning , locking , and vector database integration for
efficient file operations and retrieval .
"""
def __init__ ( self , root_dir , use_vector_db = True , max_versions =20) :
# Initialize LSFS with the specified root directory and configuration .
pass
def __del__ ( self ) :
# Destructor that stops the file system observer when the LSFS instance is deleted .
pass
def get_file_hash ( self , file_path : str ) -> str :
# Generate a SHA -256 hash for a file path .
pass
def get_file_lock ( self , file_path : str ) -> threading . Lock :
# Get or create a thread lock for a specific file path .
pass
def h an d l e_ f i le _ c ha n g e ( self , file_path : str , change_type : str ) :
# Handle file changes with proper lock management .
pass
def get _file_hi story ( self , file_path : str , limit : int = None ) -> list :
# Retrieve version history for a file from Redis cache .
def restore_version ( self , file_path : str , version_index : int ) -> bool :
# Restore a file to a previous version .
pass
def e x e c u t e _ s t o r a g e _ s y s c a l l ( self , storage_syscall ) :
# Process and route storage syscalls to appropriate file system operations .
pass
def sto_create_file ( self , file_name : str , file_path : str , collection_name : str = None ) ->
bool :
# Create a new empty file in the file system .
pass
def s t o _ c r e a t e _ d i r e c t o r y ( self , dir_name : str , dir_path : str , collection_name : str = None )
-> bool :
# Create a new directory in the file system .
pass
def sto_mount ( self , collection_name : str , root_dir : str ) -> str :
# Mount a directory for an agent and build the vector database .
pass
def sto_retrieve (
self ,
collection_name : str ,
query_text : str ,
k : str = " 3 " ,
keywords : str = None
) -> list :
# Retrieve documents from the vector database using semantic search .
def sto_rollback (
self ,
file_path ,
n =1 ,
time = None
) -> bool :
# Roll back a file to a previous version by index or timestamp .
pass
def g e n e r a t e _ s h a r e _ l i n k ( self , file_path : str ) -> str :
# Generate a publicly accessible link for sharing a file .
pass
def sto_share ( self , file_path : str , collection_name : str = None ) -> dict :
# Share a file by generating a public access link with proper lock management .
pass
20

---PAGE BREAK---

[Page 21]
Published as a conference paper at COLM 2025
A.7 Tool Manager
The tool manager module is responsible for loading tools executing tools with tool conflict
prevention mechanisms. Implementation details are shown below.
class ToolManager :
def __init__ (
self ,
log_mode : str = " console " ,
) :
pass
def e x e c u t e _ t o o l _ s y s c a l l ( self , tool_syscall ) -> ToolResponse :
pass
def l oa d _ to o l _i n s ta n c e ( self , to ol _or g_ an d_ na me ) :
pass
A.8 Access Manager
The access manager provides two key functions: First is to check access when agents attempt
to access other agents’ resources. Second is to request user permission before agents execute
irreversible actions such as deletion of files. Function interfaces are shown below.
class AccessManager :
def __init__ ( self ) :
pass
def add_privilege ( self , sid , tid ) :
# Assigns an agent into another agent 's privilege group
pass
def check_access ( self , sid , tid ) :
# Checks if the source agent is in the target agent 's priviledge group
pass
def ask_permission ( self , operation ) :
# Prompts the user for confirmation before an irreversible operation
pass
A.9 Module Hooks
To effectively separate the interface of calling the AIOS kernel modules from the implemen-
tation details, we employ a hook mechanism to initialize modules and export the necessary
call interfaces. Here are the hooks we use for initializing modules.
@validate ( LLMParams )
def useLLM ( params : LLMParams ) -> LLM :
""" Initialize and return a Language Learning Model ( LLM ) instance .
Args :
params ( LLMParams ) : Parameters required for LLM initialization .
Returns :
LLM : An instance of the initialized LLM .
"""
return LLM (** params . model_dump () )
@validate ( M e m o r y M a n a g e r P a r a m s )
def use MemoryMa nager ( params : M e m o r y M a n a g e r P a r a m s ) -> MemoryManager :
""" Initialize and return a memory instance .
Args :
params ( MemoryParams ) : Parameters required for Memory Manager Initialization .
Returns :
Memory Manager : An instance of the initialized Memory Manager .
"""
return MemoryManager (** params . model_dump () )
21

---PAGE BREAK---

[Page 22]
Published as a conference paper at COLM 2025
@validate ( S t o r a g e M a n a g e r P a r a m s )
def u se St or ag eMa na ge r ( params : S t o r a g e M a n a g e r P a r a m s ) -> StorageManager :
""" Initialize and return a storage instance .
Args :
params ( S t o r a g e M a n a g e r P a r a m s ) : Parameters required for Memory Manager Initialization .
Returns :
Storage Manager : An instance of the initialized Storage Manager .
"""
return StorageManager (** params . model_dump () )
@validate ( T oo lM an ag erP ar am s )
def useToolManager ( params : To olM an ag er Pa ram s ) -> ToolManager :
""" Initialize and return a tool instance .
Args :
params ( To ol Man ag er Pa ra ms ) : Parameters required for Tool Manager Initialization .
Returns :
Tool Manager : An instance of the initialized Tool Manager .
"""
return ToolManager (** params . model_dump () )
B AIOS SDK
The AIOS SDK provides a structured interface between user device applications and the
AIOS kernel through different functional modules. All queries from these modules are
ultimately channeled through a central send request() function in the SDK, which then
communicates with the AIOS kernel via HTTP requests (either to localhost or a remote
URL). From the agent developer’s perspective, their agents are essentially composed of
code snippets which could include agent logic and resource-related commands for LLM,
memory, storage and tool that interact with their respective modules through the SDK apis.
This creates a clean separation between the application logic and request of kernel resources.
B.1 Query and Response
The AIOS SDK defines a robust query-response architecture that enables seamless commu-
nication between agent applications and the AIOS kernel. This framework is built on two
foundational data structures: Query and Response, which facilitate structured data exchange
across the system.
Query Structure. The Query class serves as the abstract base for all input requests, estab-
lishing a consistent interface for agent interactions with the kernel. It branches into four
specialized implementations:
• LLMQuery: Facilitates natural language interactions with configurable parameters for
temperature, token limits, and various action types including chat, JSON output, tool calls,
and file operations.
• MemoryQuery: Handles transient data operations including adding, retrieving, updating,
and removing memories with specialized support for agentic memory management.
• StorageQuery: Manages persistent storage operations through parameterized requests
for file and directory manipulation.
• ToolQuery: Enables access to external capabilities through structured tool calls, extending
the system’s functionality.
Response Structure. The Response class provides a complementary structure for stan-
dardized outputs from the AIOS kernel. Each response type corresponds to its query
counterpart:
• LLMResponse: Returns generated text, tool call outcomes, completion status, and error
information from language model operations.
• MemoryResponse: Delivers memory content, metadata, search results, and operation status
for memory management functions.
22

---PAGE BREAK---

[Page 23]
Published as a conference paper at COLM 2025
AIOS-Agent SDK(Cerebrum)
AIOS Kernelsend_request(Query)
LLM Code SnippetTool Code SnippetMemory Code SnippetStorage Code Snippetsetup_planning()… # preprocess steps… # postprocess stepsreturn planning results… # call LLM apis
HTTP (localhost/remote url)
Autogen
Agent AOpen-Interpreter
MetaGPT
AgentsAgent BAgent CAgent DAgent EAgent F
setup_planning()… # preprocess steps… # postprocess stepsreturn planning results… # call tool apissetup_planning()… # preprocess steps… # postprocess stepsreturn planning results… # call memory apissetup_planning()… # preprocess steps… # postprocess stepsreturn planning results… # call storage apis
Figure 9: Illustration of how agent applications leverage the AIOS SDK to send queries to
the AIOS Kernel. For simplicity, queries sent directly to the OS kernel are omitted.
• StorageResponse: Provides operation outcomes, completion status, and error details for
storage-related activities.
• ToolResponse: Returns tool execution results, completion status, and error information
from external tool operations.
class Query ( BaseModel ) :
"""
Base class for all query types in the AIOS system .
This class serves as the foundation for specialized query classes like LLMQuery ,
MemoryQuery , StorageQuery , and ToolQuery . It defines the minimum structure required
for a valid query within the AIOS ecosystem .
Attributes :
query_class : Identifier for the query type , must be one of
[" llm " , " memory " , " storage " , " tool "]
"""
query_class : Literal [ " llm " , " memory " , " storage " , " tool " ]
class Response ( BaseModel ) :
"""
Base class for all response types in the AIOS system .
This class serves as the foundation for specialized response classes like LLMResponse ,
MemoryResponse , StorageResponse , and ToolResponse . It defines the minimum structure
required for a valid response within the AIOS ecosystem .
"""
response_class : Literal [ " llm " , " memory " , " storage " , " tool " ]
class LLMQuery ( Query ) :
query_class : str = " llm "
llms : Optional [ List [ Dict [ str , Any ]]] = Field ( default = None )
messages : List [ Dict [ str , Union [ str , Any ]]]
tools : Optional [ List [ Dict [ str , Any ]]] = Field ( default_factory = list )
action_type : Literal [ " chat " , " c h a t _ w i t h _ j s o n _ o u t p u t " , " c h a t _ w i t h _ t o o l _ c a l l _ o u t p u t " , "
call_tool " , " operate_file " ] = Field ( default = " chat " )
temperature : float = Field ( default =1.0)
max_new_tokens : int = Field ( default =1000)
m e s s a g e _ r e t u r n _ t y p e : Literal [ " text " , " json " ] = Field ( default = " text " )
response_format : Optional [ Dict [ str , Any ]] = Field ( default = None )
class Config :
a r b i t r a r y _ t y p e s _ a l l o w e d = True
23

---PAGE BREAK---

[Page 24]
Published as a conference paper at COLM 2025
class LLMResponse ( Response ) :
"""
Response class for LLM operations .
This class represents the output structure after performing LLM actions .
"""
response_class : str = " llm "
respo nse_mess age : Optional [ str ] = None
tool_calls : Optional [ List [ Dict [ str , Any ]]] = None
finished : bool = False
error : Optional [ str ] = None
status_code : int = 200
class Config :
a r b i t r a r y _ t y p e s _ a l l o w e d = True
class MemoryQuery ( Query ) :
"""
Query class for memory operations .
"""
query_class : str = " memory "
operation_type : Literal [ " add_memory " , " get_memory " , " update_memory " , " remove_memory " , "
retrieve_memory " , " a d d_ a g en t i c_ m e mo r y " ," r e t r i e v e _ m e m o r y _ r a w " ]
params : Dict [ str , Any ] = Field ( default_factory = dict )
class Config :
a r b i t r a r y _ t y p e s _ a l l o w e d = True
class MemoryResponse ( Response ) :
"""
Response class for memory operations .
"""
response_class : str = " memory "
memory_id : Optional [ str ] = None
content : Optional [ str ] = None
metadata : Optional [ Dict [ str , Any ]] = None
search_results : Optional [ List [ Dict [ str , Any ]]] = None
success : bool = False
error : Optional [ str ] = None
# status_code : int = 200
class Config :
a r b i t r a r y _ t y p e s _ a l l o w e d = True
class StorageQuery ( Query ) :
"""
Query class for storage operations .
"""
query_class : str = " storage "
params : Dict [ str , Union [ str , Any ]]
operation_type : str = Field ( default = " text " )
class Config :
a r b i t r a r y _ t y p e s _ a l l o w e d = True
class StorageResponse ( Response ) :
"""
Response class for storage operations .
"""
response_class : str = " storage "
respo nse_mess age : Optional [ str ] = None
finished : bool = False
error : Optional [ str ] = None
status_code : int = 200
24

---PAGE BREAK---

[Page 25]
Published as a conference paper at COLM 2025
class ToolQuery ( Query ) :
"""
Query class for tool operations .
"""
query_class : str = " tool "
tool_calls : List [ Dict [ str , Union [ str , Any ]]]
class Config :
a r b i t r a r y _ t y p e s _ a l l o w e d = True
class ToolResponse ( Response ) :
"""
Response class for tool operations .
"""
response_class : str = " tool "
respo nse_mess age : Optional [ str ] = None
finished : bool = False
error : Optional [ str ] = None
status_code : int = 200
B.2 AIOS SDK APIs
AIOS SDK also provides multiple API functions that are constructed using the Query and
Response data structure and send request() functions. Avaiable APIs are shown in Table 4.
Table 4: AIOS SDK APIs.
Module APIs
LLM Core llm chat, llm chat with json output, llm chat with tool call output
llm call tool, llm operate file
Memory create memory, get memory, delete memory, update memory
search memories
Storage mount, retrieve file, create file, create dir, write file, rollback file
share file
Tool call tool
B.3 Supported Tools.
As is illustrated in Table 5, AIOS SDK integrates diverse computational tools to address
a wide spectrum of information processing tasks. The SDK incorporates 17 native tools
spanning multiple modalities and functionalities, enabling sophisticated interaction patterns
across text, image, and audio domains. These tools can be categorized into three primary
sources: established technology providers (Google, Bing, WolframAlpha), specialized API
hubs (Rapid API Hub), and advanced AI model providers (Huggingface).
The toolkit’s architecture demonstrates particular strength in text-based operations, with 12
tools supporting text input or output modalities. This includes fundamental information
retrieval services (Arxiv, BingSearch, Wikipedia), specialized analytical tools (Currency-
Converter, MoonPhaseSearch), and domain-specific applications (ImdbRank, TripAdvisor).
Furthermore, the SDK exhibits robust cross-modal capabilities through tools like Visu-
alQuestionAnswering (image-text integration), TextToAudio (text-to-speech synthesis), and
VoiceActivityRecognition (speech-to-text conversion).
B.4 Agent Examples
Here we provide examples of agents developed by leveraging AIOS SDK.
Travel Agent: The travel agent is designed for trip planning, including searching for flights,
accommodations, and local activities.
Rec Agent: The recommendation agent is designed for suggesting movies and TV series.
Math Agent: This agent is designed to solve equations, perform calculations, and provide
step-by-step explanations for different math problems.
25

---PAGE BREAK---

[Page 26]
Published as a conference paper at COLM 2025
Table 5: Tools supported by AIOS SDK, ordered by names in alphabet.
Tool Name Source Type Modality (Input →Output)
Arxiv Arxiv API Text →Text
BingSearch Bing API Text →Text
CurrencyConverter Rapid API Hub API Text →Text
GooglePlace Google API Image/Text →Text
GoogleSearch Google API Text →Image
ImageCaption Huggingface Local Model/API Text →Text
ImdbRank Rapid API Hub API Text →Text
MoonPhaseSearch Rapid API Hub API Text →Text
Shazam Rapid API Hub API Text →Text/Audio
TextToAudio Huggingface Local Model/API Text →Audio
TextToImage Huggingface Local Model/API Text →Image
TripAdvisor Rapid API Hub API Text →Text
VisualQuestionAnswering Huggingface Local Model/API Image & Text→Text
VoiceActivityRecognition Huggingface Local Model/API Audio →Text
Wikipedia Wikipedia API Text →Text
WolframAlpha WolframAlpha API Text →Text
WordsAPI Rapid API Hub API Text →Text
Creation Agent: The creation agent is tailored for content generation tasks, such as writing,
graphic design, or even video editing.
Academic Agent: The academic agent is designed to support research and learning, such as
literature reviews and provide explanations on complex academic topics.
TravelAgent Profile
Description: You are an expert in planning and managing travel itineraries.
Workflow:
1. Identify the destination and search for hotel locations using the
hotel location search tool.
2. Based on the hotel locations, find suitable hotels using the hotel search tool,
and select the best one.
3. Get detailed information about the selected hotel using the get hotel details
tool.
4. Search for the nearest airport to the origin using the airport search tool.
5. Search for the nearest airport to the destination using the airport search tool.
6. Find available flights to the destination airport using the flight search tool
using the correct date.
7. Search for restaurant locations near destination using the
restaurant location search tool.
8. Based on the restaurant locations, find suitable restaurants using the
restaurant search tool.
9. Get detailed information about the selected restaurants using the
get restaurant details tool.
10. Gather additional relevant information about the destination the user is
visiting using the wikipedia tool.
11. Integrate the information gathered from the previous steps to provide a
comprehensive travel plan.
Available tools:
1. TripAdvisor
2. Wikipedia
Example of task inputs: I want to take a trip to Paris, France from July 4th to July
10th, 2024, and I am traveling from New York City. Help me plan this trip.
26

---PAGE BREAK---

[Page 27]
Published as a conference paper at COLM 2025
RecAgent Profile
Description: You are an expert who is good at recommending TV series and movies.
Workflow:
1. Identify the tool that you need to call to obtain information.
2. Based on the information, give recommendations for the user based on the
constrains.
Available tools:
1. TripAdvisor
2. Wikipedia
Example of task inputs: Recommend three action movies from the past five years
ranked between 1 and 20 with ratings above 8.0.
CreationAgent Profile
Description: You are an expert who is good at content creation.
Workflow:
1. Convert the vague description of the content requirements into concrete
objects and fill in more details.
2. Identify the tool to call the tool to create content based on the filled details.
Available tools:
1. SDXL-Turbo
Example of task inputs: Create an image of a sleek, high-tech futuristic city with a
vibrant nightlife atmosphere.
MathAgent Profile
Description: You are an expert who is good at solving mathematical problems.
Workflow:
1. Identify the tool to call to do some pre-calculation.
2. Perform mathematical operations using the pre-calculated result, which
could involve addition, subtraction, multiplication, or division with other
numeric values to solve the problem.
Available tools:
1. Currency Converter
2. WolframAlpha
Example of task inputs: Convert 15000 MXN to Canadian Dollars and find out how
much it would be in USD if 1 CAD equals 0.79 USD.
AcademicAgent Profile
Description: You are an expert who is good at looking up and obtaining
information from academic articles.
Workflow:
1. Identify the tool to call based on the academic requirements and call the
tool.
2. Gather the information obtained from the tool to write an outline or
summarization.
Available tools:
1. Arxiv API
Example of task inputs: Summarize recent studies on the role of artificial
intelligence in drug discovery from 2018 to 2023.
27

---PAGE BREAK---

[Page 28]
Published as a conference paper at COLM 2025
B.5 Support of Agent Frameworks
The core idea to adapt agents built by existing agent frameworks for AIOS is to identify the
core functions that will interact with system resources and change that with functions in
our native adapters. In this section, we illustrate the crucial adaptation function that needs
to be changed to run agents built by other agent frameworks on AIOS.
ReAct (Yao et al., 2023). The ReAct framework integrates reasoning and action steps
in language models, allowing them to generate intermediate reasoning traces alongside
actionable steps for complex task completion. This dual approach helps models not only plan
and track their thought process but also interact with external tools, improving performance
on tasks like question answering, game environments, and decision-making problems
that require multi-step reasoning and adaptability. By alternating between reasoning and
action, ReAct reduces errors from solely predictive responses and enables more accurate,
contextually aware task completion.
Reflexion (Shinn et al., 2023). The Reflexion framework enhances language agents with
a feedback-driven mechanism, allowing them to learn from mistakes and adapt behavior
through self-reflective feedback loops. By leveraging verbal reinforcement learning, agents
assess and adjust their actions, which improves performance on complex tasks through
iterative learning. This approach makes language agents more resilient and adaptive,
enabling them to handle tasks with evolving requirements and uncertainty.
Autogen (Wu et al., 2023). AutoGen introduces a framework that leverages multiple lan-
guage model agents with distinct roles (such as Planner, Executor, and Reflector) to collabo-
ratively solve complex tasks through structured, goal-oriented conversations. By enabling
agents to communicate and share intermediate results, AutoGen coordinates multi-step
processes like data analysis, decision-making, and iterative problem-solving, significantly
enhancing efficiency and accuracy beyond a single model’s capabilities. This approach
empowers next-generation applications, allowing LLMs to tackle dynamic workflows, adapt
to task-specific nuances, and achieve higher performance in real-world scenarios. Below is
the code of adapting Autogen for AIOS. Due to ongoing refactoring work by the Autogen
team, only Autogen-0.2 (the latest stable version) is supported.
@ a d d _ f r a m e w o r k _ a d a p t e r ( " AutoGen ˜0.2 " )
def p r e p a r e _ a u t o g e n _ 0 _ 2 () :
"""
Replace OpenAIWrapper and Conver sableAge nt methods with aios 's implementation .
This function is used to adapt autogen 's API to aios 's API , and it is used
internally by aios .
"""
# Replace OpenAIWrapper method
OpenAIWrapper . __init__ = a d a p t e r _ a u t o g e n _ c l i e n t _ i n i t
OpenAIWrapper . create = a d a p t e r _ c l i e n t _ c r e a t e
OpenAIWrapper . e x t r a c t _ t e x t _ o r _ c o m p l e t i o n _ o b j e c t =
a d a p t e r _ c l i e n t _ e x t r a c t _ t e x t _ o r _ c o m p l e t i o n _ o b j e c t
# Replace agent method
Conve rsableAg ent . _ p r i n t _ r e c e i v e d _ m e s s a g e = _ a d a p t e r _ p r i n t _ r e c e i v e d _ m e s s a g e
Conve rsableAg ent . _ g e n e r a t e _ o a i _ r e p l y _ f r o m _ c l i e n t = _ a d a p t e r _ g e n e r a t e _ o a i _ r e p l y _ f r o m _ c l i e n t
Conve rsableAg ent . g e n e r a t e _ t o o l _ c a l l s _ r e p l y = a d a p t e r _ g e n e r a t e _ t o o l _ c a l l s _ r e p l y
Conve rsableAg ent . exec ute_fun ction = a d a p t e r _ e x e c u t e _ f u n c t i o n
Conve rsableAg ent . _ a _ e x e c u t e _ t o o l _ c a l l = _ a d a p t e r _ a _ e x e c u t e _ t o o l _ c a l l
Conve rsableAg ent . u p d a t e _ t o o l _ s i g n a t u r e = a d a p t e r _ u p d a t e _ t o o l _ s i g n a t u r e
Conve rsableAg ent . __init__ = a d a p t e r _ a u t o g e n _ a g e n t _ i n i t
Open-Interpreter (Lucas, 2024). Open Interpreter is an open-source framework that enables
users to interact with LLMs through a ChatGPT-like interface to interpret and execute
complex instructions across programming languages directly in the terminal. It supports
both locally-hosted and cloud-based LLMs, allowing for streamlined code execution and
debugging in natural language. By translating natural language instructions into executable
code, Open Interpreter offers an intuitive environment that not only simplifies development
workflows but also facilitates learning by providing detailed explanations and interactive
support for various coding challenges, making it suitable for developers at all skill levels.
Below is the core function to be adapted for Open-Interpreter.
28

---PAGE BREAK---

[Page 29]
Published as a conference paper at COLM 2025
@ a d d _ f r a m e w o r k _ a d a p t e r ( " Open - Interpreter " )
def p r e p a r e _ i n t e r p r e t e r () :
# Prepare the interpreter for running LLM in aios .
# Set the completion function in the interpreter
interpreter . llm . completions = a d a p t e r _ a i o s _ c o m p l e t i o n s
def a d a p t e r _ a i o s _ c o m p l e t i o n s (** params ) :
# aios completions replace f i x e d _ l i t e l l m _ c o m p l e t i o n s in interpreter
# Run completion
attempts = 2
first_error = None
for attempt in range ( attempts ) :
try :
send_request = get_r equest_f unc ()
response = send_request (
query = LLMQuery (
messages = params [ ' messages '] ,
tools =( params [ " tools " ] if " tools " in params else None )
)
) [ " response " ]
# format similar to completion in interpreter
comletion = { ' choices ' :[{ ' delta ': {}}]}
comletion [ " choices " ][0][ " delta " ][ " content " ] = response [ " response _message " ]
if response . tool_calls is not None :
comletion [ " choices " ][0][ " delta " ][ " tool_calls " ] =
f o r m a t _ t o o l _ c a l l s _ t o _ i n t e r p r e t e r ( response [ " tool_calls " ])
return [ comletion ] # If the completion is successful , exit the function
except Ke yb oar dI nt er ru pt :
print ( " Exiting ... " )
sys . exit (0)
except Exception as e :
if attempt == 0:
# Store the first error
first_error = e
if first_error is not None :
raise first_error
MetaGPT (Hong et al., 2023). MetaGPT proposes a meta-programming approach that
optimizes LLM-driven multi-agent systems by integrating task-oriented programming
paradigms for complex, collaborative problem-solving. MetaGPT encodes Standardized Op-
erating Procedures (SOPs) directly into structured prompt sequences, creating streamlined
workflows that empower agents with human-like domain expertise to systematically verify
intermediate outputs and proactively mitigate errors. Along this line, MetaGPT addresses
the limitations of existing LLM-based frameworks, such as hallucination and cascading
errors during agent chaining. This framework facilitates the decomposition of complex tasks
into manageable, interdependent subtasks, improving overall system robustness, especially
in high-stakes, iterative processes where reliability across agent interactions is crucial. Below
is the core function to be adapted for MetaGPT.
@ a d d _ f r a m e w o r k _ a d a p t e r ( " MetaGPT " )
def prepare_metagpt () :
"""
Prepare the metagpt module to run on aios .
"""
p r e p a r e _ m e t a g p t _ c o n f i g ()
BaseLLM . aask = adapter_aask
async def adapter_aask (
self ,
msg : Union [ str , list [ dict [ str , str ]]] ,
system_msgs : Optional [ list [ str ]] = None ,
format_msgs : Optional [ list [ dict [ str , str ]]] = None ,
images : Optional [ Union [ str , list [ str ]]] = None ,
timeout = USE_CONFIG_TIMEOUT ,
stream = True ,
) -> str :
rsp = await a d a p t e r _ a c o m p l e t i o n _ t e x t ( message , stream = stream , timeout = self . get_timeout (
timeout ) )
return rsp if rsp else " "
29

---PAGE BREAK---

[Page 30]
Published as a conference paper at COLM 2025
C Details of Agent Benchmarks
C.1 HumanEval
The authors (Chen et al., 2021b) 1 introduced HumanEval, a benchmark dataset comprising
164 handwritten programming problems for evaluating functional correctness of code gen-
eration models. Each problem consists of a function signature, docstring, implementation
body, and comprehensive test suite, with an average of 7.7 test cases per problem. The
hand-written nature of these problems is crucial, given that modern language models are
typically trained on large portions of GitHub code containing existing solutions to program-
ming challenges and contest problems. HumanEval is designed to assess multiple aspects
of code generation capability: natural language comprehension, logical reasoning, algorith-
mic thinking, and mathematical operations. Through this publicly available benchmark,
researchers can conduct rigorous and standardized evaluations of code generation models.
C.2 MINT
MINT (Wang et al., 2023b) 2 introduced a benchmark to evaluate LLMs’ ability to solve
challenge tasks through multi-turn interactions. The benchmark focuses on code generation,
decision making, and reasoning tasks that require LLMs to utilize tools and incorporate
natural language feedback. MINT was constructed by curating multiple single-turn datasets,
reducing an original collection of 29,307 instances to 586 carefully selected examples. The
benchmark uses success rate (SR) as its primary evaluation metric, measuring the percentage
of successfully completed tasks. For a given interaction limit k ranging from 1 to 5, each
LLM is allowed up to k turns of interaction, with performance measured as SR k. In our
experiments, we set k = 5 and focus exclusively on MINT’s code generation subset.
C.3 GAIA
General AI Assistant (GAIA) (Mialon et al., 2023)3 is a benchmark designed to represent
a significant milestone in AI research by evaluating fundamental capabilities essential for
general intelligence. Unlike traditional benchmarks that focus on specialized professional
knowledge, GAIA emphasizes everyday tasks that require core abilities including logical
reasoning, multi-modal processing, web navigation, and effective tool utilization. GAIA
comprises 466 questions that evaluate AI assistants across multiple capabilities including
reasoning, multi-modal understanding, coding, and tool usage (particularly web browsing),
with tasks involving various data formats like PDFs, spreadsheets, images, videos, and
audio. The benchmark organizes questions into three difficulty levels based on the number
of required steps and tools: Level 1 requires minimal tool usage (≤ 5 steps), Level 2 demands
multiple tools and 5-10 steps, while Level 3 tests advanced general assistance capabilities
through complex, multi-step sequences requiring diverse tool combinations. Additionally,
while web browsing is central to GAIA, the benchmark deliberately excludes complex web
interactions like file uploads or posting comments, leaving such evaluations for future
research.
C.4 SWEBench-Lite
SWE-bench (Jimenez et al., 2024)4 is a software engineering benchmark constructed through
a rigorous three-stage pipeline that processes GitHub pull requests (PRs) from 12 popular
Python repositories. The pipeline filters approximately 90,000 PRs based on attributes
(issue resolution and test contribution) and execution criteria (successful installation and
fail-to-pass test transitions), resulting in 2,294 high-quality task instances. Each task requires
models to generate patch files that resolve software issues, with success determined by com-
prehensive test coverage. The benchmark distinguishes itself through real-world challenges,
extensive input context (averaging 195 words per issue), cross-context editing requirements
(typically spanning 1.7 files and 32.8 lines per solution), and robust test-based evaluation.
Notably, SWE-bench’s automated collection process enables continuous updates with new
task instances from GitHub repositories, ensuring benchmark relevance over time.
1The dataset can be found at https://www.github.com/openai/human-eval.
2https://xwang.dev/mint-bench/
3https://huggingface.co/gaia-benchmark
4https://www.swebench.com/
30

---PAGE BREAK---

[Page 31]
Published as a conference paper at COLM 2025
Table 6: Impact of using different scheduling strategies, where NONE represents without
using AIOS, FIFO and RR represent using AIOS with the two different scheduling strategies.
All metrics are reported in seconds.
Strategy Overall execution time Agent waiting time
Avg. p90
None 152.1 9.8 11.0
FIFO 74.2 3.0 5.0
RR 77.3 3.2 4.2
ReAct Reflexion Autogen Open-Interpreter MetaGPT
Agents/Agent Frameworks
0.0
0.5
1.0Throughput (Normalized)
With AIOS Without AIOS
(a) Normalized throughput. Higher is better.
ReAct Reflexion Autogen Open-Interpreter MetaGPT
Agents/Agent Frameworks
0.0
0.5
1.0Latency (Normalized)
With AIOS Without AIOS (b) Normalized latency. Lower is better.
Figure 10: Efficiency analysis on different agent frameworks evaluated on the Llama-3.1-8b
model on the MINT benchmark.
D Additional Experimental Results
D.1 Efficiency analysis.
We also report the throughput and latency of running agents on other three benchmarks
on Llama-3.1-8b and Mistral-7b compared between using AIOS and without using AIOS.
The results are shown in Figure 10 and Figure 11, Figure 12 and Figure 13, Figure 14 and
Figure 15, respectively.
Impact of Different Scheduling Strategies. To further analyze the impact of different
scheduling strategies on system efficiency, we conduct an ablation study using agents built
with ReAct on the HumanEval benchmark with the Llama-3.1-8b model. We test three
strategies: without AIOS, FIFO, and Round Robin (RR), and measure the overall execution
time and agent waiting time (average and p90).
As shown in Table 6, the FIFO strategy achieves the shortest overall execution time com-
pared to the other strategies. RR comes second in terms of overall execution and average
agent waiting time, as its context switching introduces additional overhead. However, RR
performs better on the p90 metric (i.e., the value below which 90% of waiting times fall) due
to its fairer scheduling approach, which reduces the likelihood of later tasks having longer
waiting time, which can typically occur in FIFO.
D.2 Correctness of context switch.
To assess the correctness of the context switch supported by the context manager, we employ
the BLEU score (Papineni et al., 2002) and BERT score (Zhang et al., 2019) to measure text
similarity. The similarity is calculated against the final outputs generated for the same agent
under the same conditions, only varying with context switch enabled and disabled. As
demonstrated in Table 7, both BLEU and BERT scores achieve a value of 1.0. The suggests
that the context switch does not introduce discrepancies in output quality, suggesting the
reliability of the AIOS.
E Discussion
E.1 Ethical Consideration
In this section, we discuss both potential positive and negative societal impacts of the work.
31

---PAGE BREAK---

[Page 32]
Published as a conference paper at COLM 2025
ReAct Reflexion Autogen Open-Interpreter MetaGPT
Agents/Agent Frameworks
0.0
0.5
1.0Throughput (Normalized)
With AIOS Without AIOS
(a) Normalized throughput. Higher is better.
ReAct Reflexion Autogen Open-Interpreter MetaGPT
Agents/Agent Frameworks
0.0
0.5
1.0Latency (Normalized)
With AIOS Without AIOS (b) Normalized latency. Lower is better.
Figure 11: Efficiency analysis on different agent frameworks evaluated on the Mistral-7b
model on the MINT benchmark.
ReAct Reflexion Autogen Open-Interpreter MetaGPT
Agents/Agent Frameworks
0.0
0.5
1.0Throughput (Normalized)
With AIOS Without AIOS
(a) Normalized throughput. Higher is better.
ReAct Reflexion Autogen Open-Interpreter MetaGPT
Agents/Agent Frameworks
0.0
0.5
1.0Latency (Normalized)
With AIOS Without AIOS (b) Normalized latency. Lower is better.
Figure 12: Efficiency analysis on different agent frameworks evaluated on the Llama-3.1-8b
model on the GAIA benchmark.
The potential positive societal impacts include: 1) Enhanced efficiency and productivity:
AIOS can automate routine tasks, achieve more efficient operations, optimize resource
allocation, and reduce bottlenecks, leading to better service and improved efficiency for
agent developers; 2) Improved user experience: with better context, memory, and storage
management, AIOS can offer more personalized and responsive interactions, enhancing
user satisfaction across various applications; 3) Innovation ecosystem: the creation of AIOS
could foster a vibrant ecosystem of agent developers and researchers, driving innovation in
AI technologies and applications.
The potential negative societal impacts include: 1) Privacy concerns: the integration of
LLMs into operating systems may raise privacy concerns, as AI models such as LLMs may
require access to personal data to provide effective services; 2) Security risks: as AI systems
become more integral to critical infrastructure, they could become targets for cyberattacks,
potentially compromising sensitive data and operations; 3) System failures: the failure
of integrated systems could have widespread consequences, affecting multiple sectors
simultaneously and causing disruptions.
Balancing the impacts: To maximize the positive impacts and mitigate the negative ones, it
is crucial to adopt a balanced approach to the development and deployment of AIOS, such
as 1) Rules and standards: Implementing responsible development rules and standards to
ensure data privacy, security, and ethical use of AI; 2) Robust design: implementing robust
system design, regular maintenance, comprehensive testing, continuous monitoring, backup
Table 7: Correctness of context switch (text-based and logits-based), which checks the
similarity between the generated final outputs with context switch enabled and disabled.
LLM Core Method BLEU Score BERT Score
Mistral-7B Text-based 1.0 1.0
Logits-based 1.0 1.0
Llama-3-8B Text-based 1.0 1.0
Logits-based 1.0 1.0
32

---PAGE BREAK---

[Page 33]
Published as a conference paper at COLM 2025
ReAct Reflexion Autogen Open-Interpreter MetaGPT
Agents/Agent Frameworks
0.0
0.5
1.0Throughput (Normalized)
With AIOS Without AIOS
(a) Normalized throughput. Higher is better.
ReAct Reflexion Autogen Open-Interpreter MetaGPT
Agents/Agent Frameworks
0.0
0.5
1.0Latency (Normalized)
With AIOS Without AIOS (b) Normalized latency. Lower is better.
Figure 13: Efficiency analysis on different agent frameworks evaluated on the Mistral-7b
model on the GAIA benchmark.
ReAct Reflexion Autogen Open-Interpreter MetaGPT
Agents/Agent Frameworks
0.0
0.5
1.0Throughput (Normalized)
With AIOS Without AIOS
(a) Normalized throughput. Higher is better.
ReAct Reflexion Autogen Open-Interpreter MetaGPT
Agents/Agent Frameworks
0.0
0.5
1.0Latency (Normalized)
With AIOS Without AIOS (b) Normalized latency. Lower is better.
Figure 14: Efficiency analysis on different agent frameworks evaluated on the Llama-3.1-8b
model on the SWE-Bench-Lite benchmark.
and recovery plans, developer training, careful documentation, clear communication, and
leveraging AI for predictive maintenance and automated recovery; 3) Public engagement:
engaging with the public to raise awareness about the benefits and challenges of AI, ensuring
that societal concerns are addressed in the development process.
By addressing these considerations, society can harness the potential of AIOS while mitigat-
ing its risks, leading to a more equitable and prosperous future.
E.2 Future Directions
With AIOS as a foundation, there are many directions for future research to pursue. This
section outlines potential areas of study that expand upon AIOS.
Semantic Scheduling Algorithms. The scheduling function of AIOS lays the groundwork
for the development of more advanced algorithms. Future research could focus on algo-
rithms that perform dependency analysis among agent requests, optimizing the allocation
of computational resources. Additionally, some of the tool resources are locally deployed
models, which can also be incorporated into the scheduling paradigm. This includes the
management of tool status and snapshots, suggesting a move towards a unified scheduling
framework that encompasses both agents and their tools.
Efficiency of Context Management. More efficient mechanisms can be devised to assist
context management. For example, the pursuit of time-efficient context management
techniques could significantly augment user experience by expediting the processes of
context snapshotting and restoration. Also, context compression techniques can also be
leveraged prior to snapshotting, which can yield a more space-efficient solution.
Optimization of Memory and Storage Architecture. In the context of agent collaboration
and communication, the future design of memory and storage systems can adopt a shared
approach, enabling the sharing of memory and storage between agents. Such an architecture
would enable agents to access a communal pool of memory and storage, thereby improving
the agents’ decision-making ability since one agent can benefit from other agents’ memory
or storage. Moreover, future work can explore hierarchical storage solutions, designed
to optimize data retrieval and storage efficiency. This could involve prioritizing quicker
access and reduced storage allocation for frequently accessed data, and vice versa for less
frequently accessed information.
33

---PAGE BREAK---

[Page 34]
Published as a conference paper at COLM 2025
ReAct Reflexion Autogen Open-Interpreter MetaGPT
Agents/Agent Frameworks
0.0
0.5
1.0Throughput (Normalized)
With AIOS Without AIOS
(a) Normalized throughput. Higher is better.
ReAct Reflexion Autogen Open-Interpreter MetaGPT
Agents/Agent Frameworks
0.0
0.5
1.0Latency (Normalized)
With AIOS Without AIOS (b) Normalized latency. Lower is better.
Figure 15: Efficiency analysis on different agent frameworks evaluated on the Mistral-7b
model on the SWE-Bench-Lite benchmark.
Safety and Privacy Enhancements. The aspect of safety in AIOS necessitates protective
measures against various attacks, ensuring the system’s resilience against malicious attacks,
such as jailbreaking of LLM or unauthorized access of other agents’ memory. In the realm
of privacy, the exploration of advanced encryption techniques is vital for safeguarding data
transmission within AIOS, thus maintaining the confidentiality of agent communications.
Furthermore, the implementation of watermarking techniques could serve to protect the
intellectual property of agent developers by embedding unique identifiers in outputs,
facilitating the tracing of data lineage.
In a nutshell, AIOS stands as a motivating body of work that brings a broad spectrum of
research opportunities. Each outlined direction not only can build upon the foundational
elements of AIOS but also can contribute to the advancement of the field at large.
34