[Page 1]
Front. Comput. Sci., 2025, 0(0): 1–42
https://doi.org/10.1007/s11704-024-40231-1
REVIEW ARTICLE
A Survey on Large Language Model based Autonomous
Agents
Lei Wang, Chen Ma*, Xueyang Feng*, Zeyu Zhang, Hao Yang, Jingsen Zhang,
Zhi-Yuan Chen, Jiakai Tang, Xu Chen(B), Yankai Lin(B), Wayne Xin Zhao,
Zhewei Wei, Ji-Rong Wen
Gaoling School of Artificial Intelligence, Renmin University of China, Beijing, 100872, China
© Higher Education Press 2025
Abstract Autonomous agents have long been a
research focus in academic and industry commu-
nities. Previous research often focuses on training
agents with limited knowledge within isolated envi-
ronments, which diverges significantly from human
learning processes, and makes the agents hard to
achieve human-like decisions. Recently, through
the acquisition of vast amounts of web knowledge,
large language models (LLMs) have shown poten-
tial in human-level intelligence, leading to a surge in
research on LLM-based autonomous agents. In this
paper, we present a comprehensive survey of these
studies, delivering a systematic review of LLM-
based autonomous agents from a holistic perspec-
tive. We first discuss the construction of LLM-based
autonomous agents, proposing a unified framework
that encompasses much of previous work. Then, we
present an overview of the diverse applications of
LLM-based autonomous agents in social science,
natural science, and engineering. Finally, we delve
into the evaluation strategies commonly used for
LLM-based autonomous agents. Based on the pre-
vious studies, we also present several challenges
and future directions in this field.
Keywords Autonomous agent, Large language
model, Human-level intelligence
1 Introduction
“An autonomous agent is a system situated within and a
part of an environment that senses that environment and
acts on it, over time, in pursuit of its own agenda and so
as to effect what it senses in the future. ”
Franklin and Graesser (1997)
Autonomous agents have long been recognized
as a promising approach to achieving artificial gen-
eral intelligence (AGI), which is expected to ac-
Received month dd, yyyy; accepted month dd, yyyy
E-mail: xu.chen@ruc.edu.cn;yankailin@ruc.edu.cn
*Both authors contribute equally to this paper.
arXiv:2308.11432v7  [cs.AI]  2 Mar 2025

---PAGE BREAK---

[Page 2]
2 Front. Comput. Sci., 2025, 0(0): 1–42
2021-1 2022-1 2023-2 2023-4 2023-6 2023-8
Time（Year-Month）
NumberofPapers（cumulated）
WebGPT
2021-12
Generative Agent2023-4
Voyager 2023-5
ToolBench 2023-7
AgentSims 2023-8
Tool Agent
Simulation Agent
General Agent
Embodied Agent
TALM2022-5
HuggingGPT2023-3
Game Agent
CoT 2022-1
Web Agent
WebShop2022-7
InnerMonologue2022-7
DEPS2023-2
Toolformer2023-2
AutoGPT2023-3
Assistant Agent
AgentGPT2023-4
 RecAgent 2023-6
GITM2023-5
ToT2023-5
MIND2WEB2023-6
CO-LLM 2023-7
ChatDev 2023-7
Fig. 1 Illustration of the growth trend in the field of LLM-based autonomous agents. We present the cumulative number of
papers published from January 2021 to August 2023. We assign di fferent colors to represent various agent categories. For
example, a game agent aims to simulate a game-player, while a tool agent mainly focuses on tool using. For each time period,
we provide a curated list of studies with diverse agent categories.
complish tasks through self-directed planning and
actions. In previous studies, the agents are assumed
to act based on simple and heuristic policy func-
tions, and learned in isolated and restricted envi-
ronments [1 –6]. Such assumptions significantly
differs from the human learning process, since the
human mind is highly complex and individuals can
learn from a much wider variety of environments.
Because of these gaps, the agents obtained from
previous studies are usually far from replicating
human-level decision processes, especially in un-
constrained, open-domain settings.
In recent years, large language models (LLMs)
have achieved notable successes, demonstrating
significant potential to achieve human-like intel-
ligence [5–10]. This capability arises from lever-
aging comprehensive training datasets alongside a
substantial number of model parameters. Build-
ing upon this capability, there has been a growing
research area that employs LLMs as central con-
trollers to construct autonomous agents to obtain
human-like decision-making capabilities [11–17].
Compared to reinforcement learning, LLM-based
agents possess more comprehensive internal world
knowledge, enabling them to perform informed ac-
tions even without training on specific domain data.
Furthermore, LLM-based agents can offer natural
language interfaces for human interaction, provid-
ing greater flexibility and enhanced explainability.
Along this direction, researchers have developed
numerous promising models (see Figure 1 for an
overview), where the key idea is to equip LLMs
with human capabilities such as memory and plan-
ning to make them behave like humans and com-
plete various tasks e ffectively. Previously, these
models were proposed independently, with limited
efforts made to summarize and compare them holis-
tically. However, we believe that a systematic sum-

---PAGE BREAK---

[Page 3]
Lei Wang et al. A Survey on Large Language Model based Autonomous Agents 3
mary of this rapidly developing field is of great
significance for a comprehensive understanding of
it and is beneficial in inspiring future research.
In this paper, we conduct a comprehensive sur-
vey of the field of LLM-based autonomous agents.
We organize our survey around three key aspects:
construction, application, and evaluation of LLM-
based autonomous agents. For agent construction,
we focus on two problems, that is, (1) how to design
the agent architecture to better leverage LLMs, and
(2) how to inspire and enhance the agent capabil-
ity to complete different tasks. Intuitively, the first
problem aims to build the hardware fundamentals
for the agent, while the second problem focuses on
providing the agent with software resources. For the
first problem, we present a unified agent framework,
which can encompass most of the previous studies.
For the second problem, we provide a summary on
the commonly-used strategies for agents’ capability
acquisition. In addition to discussing agent con-
struction, we also provide a systematic overview of
the applications of LLM-based autonomous agents
in social science, natural science, and engineering.
Finally, we delve into the strategies for evaluating
LLM-based autonomous agents, focusing on both
subjective and objective strategies.
In summary, this survey conducts a systematic
review and establishes comprehensive taxonomies
for existing studies in the burgeoning field of LLM-
based autonomous agents. Our focus encompasses
three primary areas: the construction of agents, their
applications, and methods of evaluation. Drawing
from a wealth of previous studies, we identify var-
ious challenges in this field and discuss potential
future directions. We expect that our survey can pro-
vide newcomers of LLM-based autonomous agents
with a comprehensive background knowledge, and
also encourage further groundbreaking studies.
2 LLM-based Autonomous Agent Con-
struction
LLM-based autonomous agents are expected to ef-
fectively perform diverse tasks by leveraging the
human-like capabilities of LLMs. In order to achieve
this goal, there are two significant aspects: (1) which
architecture should be designed to better use LLMs
and (2) given the designed architecture, how to en-
able the agent to acquire capabilities for accomplish-
ing specific tasks. Within the context of architec-
ture design, we contribute a systematic synthesis of
existing research, culminating in a comprehensive
unified framework. As for the second aspect, we
summarize the strategies for agent capability acqui-
sition based on whether they fine-tune the LLMs.
Comparing LLM-based autonomous agents to tradi-
tional machine learning, architecture design is anal-
ogous to defining the network structure, while capa-
bility acquisition resembles the process of learning
network parameters. In the following sections, we
explore these two aspects in greater detail.
2.1 Agent Architecture Design
Recent advancements in LLMs have demonstrated
their great potential to accomplish a wide range
of tasks in the form of question-answering (QA).
However, building autonomous agents is far from
QA, since they need to fulfill specific roles and
autonomously perceive and learn from the environ-
ment to evolve themselves like humans. To bridge
the gap between traditional LLMs and autonomous
agents, a crucial aspect is to design rational agent
architectures to assist LLMs in maximizing their ca-
pabilities. Along this direction, previous work has
developed a number of modules to enhance LLMs.
In this section, we propose a unified framework to
summarize these modules. Specifically, the overall

---PAGE BREAK---

[Page 4]
4 Front. Comput. Sci., 2025, 0(0): 1–42
ØDemographicInformation
ØPersonalityInformation
ØSocialInformation
ØHandcraftingMethod
ØLLM-GenerationMethod
ØDatasetAlignmentMethod
Profile ActionMemory Planning
ØTask Completion
ØCommunication
ØMemory Reading
ØMemory Writing
ØMemory Reflection
ØUnified Memory
ØHybrid Memory
ØLanguages
ØEmbeddings 
ØEnvironmentFeedback
ØHuman Feedback
ØModel Feedback
ØSingle-path Reasoning
ØMulti-path Reasoning
ØExternal Planner
GenerationStrategy
ProfileContents
MemoryOperation
MemoryStructure
MemoryFormats
Planningw/oFeedback
Planningw/Feedback
ActionTarget
ActionProduction
ActionImpact
ØTools
ØDatabases
ØLists
ØSelf-Knowledge
ØExploration
ØMemory Recollection
ØEnvironments
ØInternal States
ActionSpace
ØPlan Following
ØNew Actions
Fig. 2 A unified framework for the architecture design of LLM-based autonomous agent.
structure of our framework is illustrated in Figure 2,
which is composed of a profiling module, a memory
module, a planning module, and an action module.
The purpose of the profiling module is to identify
the role of the agent. The memory and planning
modules place the agent into a dynamic environ-
ment, enabling it to recall past behaviors and plan
future actions. The action module is responsible for
translating the agent’s decisions into specific out-
puts. Within these modules, the profiling module
impacts the memory and planning modules, and col-
lectively, these three modules influence the action
module. In the following, we detail these modules.
2.1.1 Profiling Module
Autonomous agents typically perform tasks by as-
suming specific roles, such as coders, teachers, and
domain experts [18, 19]. The profiling module aims
to indicate the profiles of the agent roles, which
are usually written into the prompt to influence
the behavior of the LLM. Agent profiles typically
encompass basic information such as age, gender,
and career [20], as well as psychology information,
reflecting the personalities of the agents, and so-
cial information, detailing the relationships between
agents [21]. The choice of information to profile the
agent is largely determined by the specific applica-
tion scenarios. For instance, if the application aims
to study human cognitive process, then the psychol-
ogy information becomes pivotal. After identifying
the types of profile information, the next important
problem is to create specific profiles for the agents.
Existing literature commonly employs the following
three strategies.
Handcrafting Method: in this method, agent
profiles are manually specified. For instance, if one
would like to design agents with di fferent person-
alities, he can use "you are an outgoing person" or
"you are an introverted person" to profile the agent.
The handcrafting method has been leveraged in a
lot of previous work to specify the agent profiles.
For example, Generative Agent [22] describes the
agent by the information such as name, objectives,
and relationships with other agents. MetaGPT [23],
ChatDev [18], and Self-collaboration [24] predefine

---PAGE BREAK---

[Page 5]
Lei Wang et al. A Survey on Large Language Model based Autonomous Agents 5
various roles and their corresponding responsibili-
ties in software development, manually assigning
distinct profiles to each agent to facilitate collabo-
ration. PTLLM [25] aims to explore and quantify
personality traits displayed in texts generated by
LLMs. This method guides LLMs in generating di-
verse responses by manually defining various agent
characters through the use of personality assessment
tools such as IPIP-NEO [26] and BFI [27]. [28]
studies the toxicity of the LLM output by manu-
ally prompting LLMs with different roles, such as
politicians, journalists and businesspersons. In gen-
eral, the handcrafting method is very flexible, since
one can assign any profile information to the agents.
However, it can be also labor-intensive, particularly
when dealing with a large number of agents.
LLM-generation Method: in this method, agent
profiles are automatically generated based on LLMs.
Typically, it begins by indicating the profile gen-
eration rules, elucidating the composition and at-
tributes of the agent profiles within the target popu-
lation. Then, one can optionally specify several seed
agent profiles to serve as few-shot examples. Fi-
nally, LLMs are leveraged to generate all the agent
profiles. For example, RecAgent [21] first creates
seed profiles for a few agents by manually crafting
their attributes such as age, gender, personal traits,
and movie preferences. Then, it leverages ChatGPT
to generate more agent profiles based on the seed in-
formation. This approach significantly reduces the
time and effort required to construct agent profiles,
particularly for large-scale populations. However, it
may lack precise control over the generated profiles,
which can result in inconsistencies or deviations
from the intended characteristics.
Dataset Alignment Method: in this method, the
agent profiles are obtained from real-world datasets.
Typically, one can first organize the information
about real humans in the datasets into natural lan-
guage prompts, and then leverage it to profile the
agents. For instance, in [29], the authors assign
roles to GPT-3 based on the demographic back-
grounds (such as race /ethnicity, gender, age, and
state of residence) of participants in the Ameri-
can National Election Studies (ANES). They sub-
sequently investigate whether GPT-3 can produce
similar results to those of real humans. The dataset
alignment method accurately captures the attributes
of the real population, thereby making the agent
behaviors more meaningful and reflective of real-
world scenarios.
Remark. While most of the previous work lever-
age the above profile generation strategies indepen-
dently, we argue that combining them may yield
additional benefits. For example, in order to predict
social developments via agent simulation, one can
leverage real-world datasets to profile a subset of
the agents, thereby accurately reflecting the current
social status. Subsequently, roles that do not exist
in the real world but may emerge in the future can
be manually assigned to the other agents, enabling
the prediction of future social development. Be-
yond this example, one can also flexibly combine
the other strategies. The profile module serves as
the foundation for agent design, exerting significant
influence on the agent memorization, planning, and
action procedures.
2.1.2 Memory Module
The memory module plays a very important role
in the agent architecture design. It stores informa-
tion perceived from the environment and leverages
the recorded memories to facilitate future actions.
The memory module can help the agent to accumu-
late experiences, self-evolve, and behave in a more
consistent, reasonable, and effective manner. This

---PAGE BREAK---

[Page 6]
6 Front. Comput. Sci., 2025, 0(0): 1–42
section provides a comprehensive overview of the
memory module, focusing on its structures, formats,
and operations.
Memory Structures: LLM-based autonomous
agents often draw inspiration from cognitive sci-
ence research on human memory processes. Hu-
man memory follows a general progression from
sensory memory that registers perceptual inputs,
to short-term memory that maintains information
transiently, to long-term memory that consolidates
information over extended periods. When design-
ing the agent memory structures, researchers take
inspiration from these aspects of human memory.
In particular, short-term memory is analogous to
the input information within the context window
constrained by the transformer architecture. Long-
term memory resembles the external vector storage
that agents can rapidly query and retrieve from as
needed. In the following, we introduce two com-
monly used memory structures based on the short-
term and long-term memories.
• Unified Memory. This structure only simu-
lates the human short-term memory, which is usu-
ally realized by in-context learning, and the memory
information is directly written into the prompts. For
example, RLP [30] is a conversation agent, which
maintains internal states for the speaker and lis-
tener. During each round of conversation, these
states serve as LLM prompts, functioning as the
agent’s short-term memory. SayPlan [31] is an em-
bodied agent specifically designed for task plan-
ning. In this agent, the scene graphs and envi-
ronment feedback serve as the agent’s short-term
memory, guiding its actions. CALYPSO [32] is an
agent designed for the game Dungeons & Dragons,
which can assist Dungeon Masters in the creation
and narration of stories. Its short-term memory
is built upon scene descriptions, monster informa-
tion, and previous summaries. DEPS [33] is also
a game agent, developed for Minecraft. The agent
initially generates task plans and then utilizes them
to prompt LLMs, which in turn produce actions to
complete the task. These plans can be deemed as
the agent’s short-term memory. In practice, imple-
menting short-term memory is straightforward and
can enhance an agent’s ability to perceive recent or
contextually sensitive behaviors and observations.
However, the limited context window of LLMs re-
stricts incorporating comprehensive memories into
prompts, which can impair agent performance. This
challenge necessitates LLMs with larger context
windows and the ability to handle extended con-
texts. Consequently, numerous researchers turn to
hybrid memory systems to mitigate this issue.
• Hybrid Memory. This structure explicitly
models the human short-term and long-term mem-
ories. The short-term memory temporarily buffers
recent perceptions, while long-term memory con-
solidates important information over time. For in-
stance, Generative Agent [20] employs a hybrid
memory structure to facilitate agent behaviors. The
short-term memory contains the context informa-
tion about the agent current situations, while the
long-term memory stores the agent past behaviors
and thoughts, which can be retrieved according to
the current events. AgentSims [34] also implements
a hybrid memory architecture. The information pro-
vided in the prompt can be considered as short-term
memory. In order to enhance the storage capac-
ity of memory, the authors propose a long-term
memory system that utilizes a vector database, fa-
cilitating e fficient storage and retrieval. Specifi-
cally, the agent’s daily memories are encoded as
embeddings and stored in the vector database. If
the agent needs to recall its previous memories, the
long-term memory system retrieves relevant infor-

---PAGE BREAK---

[Page 7]
Lei Wang et al. A Survey on Large Language Model based Autonomous Agents 7
mation using embedding similarities. This process
can improve the consistency of the agent’s behav-
ior. In GITM [16], the short-term memory stores
the current trajectory, and the long-term memory
saves reference plans summarized from successful
prior trajectories. Long-term memory provides sta-
ble knowledge, while short-term memory allows
flexible planning. Reflexion [12] utilizes a short-
term sliding window to capture recent feedback and
incorporates persistent long-term storage to retain
condensed insights. This combination allows for the
utilization of both detailed immediate experiences
and high-level abstractions. SCM [35] selectively
activates the most relevant long-term knowledge
to combine with short-term memory, enabling rea-
soning over complex contextual dialogues. Sim-
plyRetrieve [36] utilizes user queries as short-term
memory and stores long-term memory using pri-
vate knowledge bases. This design enhances the
model accuracy while guaranteeing user privacy.
MemorySandbox [37] implements long-term and
short-term memory to store different objects, which
can then be accessed throughout various conversa-
tions. Users can create multiple conversations with
different agents on the same canvas, facilitating the
sharing of memory objects through a simple drag-
and-drop interface. In practice, integrating both
short-term and long-term memories can enhance an
agent’s ability for long-range reasoning and accu-
mulation of valuable experiences, which are crucial
for accomplishing tasks in complex environments.
Remark. Careful readers may find that there may
also exist another type of memory structure, that is,
only based on the long-term memory. However, we
find that such type of memory is rarely documented
in the literature. Our speculation is that the agents
are always situated in continuous and dynamic en-
vironments, with consecutive actions displaying a
high correlation. Therefore, the capture of short-
term memory is very important and usually cannot
be disregarded.
Memory Formats: In addition to the memory
structure, another perspective to analyze the mem-
ory module is based on the formats of the mem-
ory storage medium, for example, natural language
memory or embedding memory. Different memory
formats possess distinct strengths and are suitable
for various applications. In the following, we intro-
duce several representative memory formats.
• Natural Languages. In this format, memory
information such as the agent behaviors and ob-
servations are directly described using raw natural
language. This format possesses several strengths.
Firstly, the memory information can be expressed
in a flexible and understandable manner. Moreover,
it retains rich semantic information that can provide
comprehensive signals to guide agent behaviors. In
the previous work, Reflexion [12] stores experien-
tial feedback in natural language within a sliding
window. V oyager [38] employs natural language
descriptions to represent skills within the Minecraft
game, which are directly stored in memory.
• Embeddings. In this format, memory infor-
mation is encoded into embedding vectors, which
enhances both retrieval and reading efficiency. For
instance, MemoryBank [39] encodes each memory
segment as an embedding vector and employs a
dual-tower dense retrieval model to e fficiently re-
trieve relevant information from past conversations.
• Databases. In this format, memory infor-
mation is stored in databases, allowing the agent
to manipulate memories efficiently and comprehen-
sively. For example, ChatDB [40] uses a database
as a symbolic memory module. The agent can uti-
lize SQL statements to precisely add, delete, and
modify the memory information.

---PAGE BREAK---

[Page 8]
8 Front. Comput. Sci., 2025, 0(0): 1–42
• Structured Lists. In this format, memory in-
formation is organized into lists, and the semantic of
memory can be conveyed in an efficient and concise
manner. For instance, GITM [16] stores action lists
for sub-goals in a hierarchical tree structure. The hi-
erarchical structure explicitly captures the relation-
ships between goals and corresponding plans. RET-
LLM [41] initially converts natural language sen-
tences into triplet phrases, and subsequently stores
them in memory.
Remark. Here we only show several representative
memory formats, but it is important to note that
there are many uncovered ones, such as the pro-
gramming code used by [38]. Moreover, it should
be emphasized that these formats are not mutually
exclusive; many models incorporate multiple for-
mats to concurrently harness their respective bene-
fits. A notable example is the memory module of
GITM [16], which utilizes a key-value list struc-
ture. In this structure, the keys are represented by
embedding vectors, while the values consist of raw
natural languages. The use of embedding vectors
allows for efficient retrieval of memory records. By
utilizing natural languages, the memory contents
become highly comprehensive, enabling more in-
formed agent actions.
Above, we mainly discuss the internal designs
of the memory module. In the following, we turn
our focus to memory operations, which are used to
interact with external environments.
Memory Operations: The memory module plays
a critical role in allowing the agent to acquire, ac-
cumulate, and utilize significant knowledge by in-
teracting with the environment. The interaction
between the agent and the environment is accom-
plished through three crucial memory operations:
memory reading, memory writing, and memory re-
flection. In the following, we introduce these opera-
tions more in detail.
• Memory Reading. The objective of mem-
ory reading is to extract meaningful information
from memory to enhance the agent’s actions. For
example, using the previously successful actions to
achieve similar goals [16]. The key of memory read-
ing lies in how to extract valuable information from
history actions. Usually, there are three commonly
used criteria for information extraction, that is, the
recency, relevance, and importance [20]. Memories
that are more recent, relevant, and important are
more likely to be extracted. Formally, we conclude
the following equation from existing literature for
memory information extraction:
m∗ = arg max
m∈M

αsrec(q, m) +βsrel(q, m) +γsimp(m)

,
(1)
where q is the query, for example, the task that
the agent should address or the context in which
the agent is situated. M is the set of all memories.
srec(·), srel(·) and simp(·) are the scoring functions for
measuring the recency, relevance, and importance of
the memory m, with higher scores indicating more
recent, more relevant, and more important memo-
ries respectively. These scoring functions can be
implemented using various methods, for example,
srel(q, m) can be calculated using vector similarity
measures between query and memory embeddings.
It should be noted that simp only reflects the charac-
ters of the memory itself, thus it is unrelated to the
query q. α,β andγ are balancing parameters. By
assigning them with different values, one can obtain
various memory reading strategies. For example, by
settingα =γ = 0, many studies [16,30,38,41] only
consider the relevance score srel for memory read-
ing. By assigning α = β = γ = 1.0, [20] equally
weights all the above three metrics to extract infor-
mation from memory.
• Memory Writing. The purpose of memory

---PAGE BREAK---

[Page 9]
Lei Wang et al. A Survey on Large Language Model based Autonomous Agents 9
writing is to store information about the perceived
environment in memory. Storing valuable informa-
tion in memory provides a foundation for retrieving
informative memories in the future, enabling the
agent to act more efficiently and rationally. During
the memory writing process, there are two poten-
tial problems that should be carefully addressed.
On one hand, it is crucial to address how to store
information that is similar to existing memories
(i.e., memory duplicated). On the other hand, it
is important to consider how to remove informa-
tion when the memory reaches its storage limit (i.e.,
memory overflow). In the following, we discuss
these problems more in detail. (1) Memory Dupli-
cated. To incorporate similar information, people
have developed various methods for integrating new
and previous records. For instance, in [16], the
successful action sequences related to the same sub-
goal are stored in a list. Once the size of the list
reaches N(=5), all the sequences in it are condensed
into a unified plan solution using LLMs. The origi-
nal sequences in the memory are replaced with the
newly generated one. Augmented LLM [42] aggre-
gates duplicate information via count accumulation,
avoiding redundant storage. (2) Memory Overflow.
In order to write information into the memory when
it is full, people design different methods to delete
existing information to continue the memorizing
process. For example, in ChatDB [40], memories
can be explicitly deleted based on user commands.
RET-LLM [41] uses a fixed-size buffer for memory,
overwriting the oldest entries in a first-in-first-out
(FIFO) manner.
• Memory Reflection. Memory reflection emu-
lates humans’ ability to witness and evaluate their
own cognitive, emotional, and behavioral processes.
When adapted to agents, the objective is to pro-
vide agents with the capability to independently
summarize and infer more abstract, complex and
high-level information. More specifically, in Gen-
erative Agent [20], the agent has the capability to
summarize its past experiences stored in memory
into broader and more abstract insights. To begin
with, the agent generates three key questions based
on its recent memories. Then, these questions are
used to query the memory to obtain relevant infor-
mation. Building upon the acquired information,
the agent generates five insights, which reflect the
agent high-level ideas. For example, the low-level
memories “Klaus Mueller is writing a research pa-
per”, “Klaus Mueller is engaging with a librarian
to further his research”, and “Klaus Mueller is con-
versing with Ayesha Khan about his research” can
induce the high-level insight “Klaus Mueller is ded-
icated to his research”. In addition, the reflection
process can occur hierarchically, meaning that the
insights can be generated based on existing insights.
In GITM [16], the actions that successfully accom-
plish the sub-goals are stored in a list. When the
list contains more than five elements, the agent sum-
marizes them into a common and abstract pattern
and replaces all the elements. In ExpeL [43], two
approaches are introduced for the agent to acquire
reflection. Firstly, the agent compares successful or
failed trajectories within the same task. Secondly,
the agent learns from a collection of successful tra-
jectories to gain experiences.
A significant distinction between traditional LLMs
and the agents is that the latter must possess the ca-
pability to learn and complete tasks in dynamic en-
vironments. If we consider the memory module as
responsible for managing the agents’ past behaviors,
it becomes essential to have another significant mod-
ule that can assist the agents in planning their future
actions. In the following, we present an overview
of how researchers design the planning module.

---PAGE BREAK---

[Page 10]
10 Front. Comput. Sci., 2025, 0(0): 1–42
Prompts
LLM
Reasoning Step-1
Reasoning Step-2
Reasoning Step-n
CoT，Zero-shotCot
Prompts
LLM
Reasoning Step-1
Reasoning Step-2
ReWOO，HuggingGPT
LLM
Reasoning Step-n
LLM
Prompts
LLM
Step-1
Step-2
Step-n
CoT-SC
Single-Path
Reasoning
Multi-Path
Reasoning
Step-1
Step-2
Step-n
Step-1
Step-2
Step-n
Prompts
LLM
ToT，LMZSP，RAP
Step-1
Step-2
 Step-2
 Step-2
Step-3Step-3Step-3Step-3
Fig. 3 Comparison between the strategies of single-path and multi-path reasoning. LMZSP is the model proposed in [44].
2.1.3 Planning Module
When faced with a complex task, humans tend to
deconstruct it into simpler subtasks and solve them
individually. The planning module aims to empower
the agents with such human capability, which is
expected to make the agent behave more reasonably,
powerfully, and reliably. In specific, we summarize
existing studies based on whether the agent can
receive feedback in the planing process, which are
detailed as follows:
Planning without Feedback: In this method, the
agents do not receive feedback that can influence its
future behaviors after taking actions. In the follow-
ing, we present several representative strategies.
• Single-path Reasoning. In this strategy, the
final task is decomposed into several intermediate
steps. These steps are connected in a cascading man-
ner, with each step leading to only one subsequent
step. LLMs follow these steps to achieve the final
goal. Specifically, Chain of Thought (CoT) [45]
proposes inputting reasoning steps for solving com-
plex problems into the prompt. These steps serve
as examples to inspire LLMs to plan and act in a
step-by-step manner. In this method, the plans are
created based on the inspiration from the examples
in the prompts. Zero-shot-CoT [46] enables LLMs
to generate task reasoning processes by prompt-
ing them with trigger sentences like "think step by
step". Unlike CoT, this method does not incorpo-
rate reasoning steps as examples in the prompts. Re-
Prompting [47] involves checking whether each step
meets the necessary prerequisites before generating
a plan. If a step fails to meet the prerequisites, it
introduces a prerequisite error message and prompts
the LLM to regenerate the plan. ReWOO [48] intro-
duces a paradigm of separating plans from external
observations, where the agents first generate plans
and obtain observations independently, and then
combine them together to derive the final results.
HuggingGPT [13] first decomposes the task into
many sub-goals, and then solves each of them based
on Huggingface. Di fferent from CoT and Zero-
shot-CoT, which outcome all the reasoning steps
in a one-shot manner, ReWOO and HuggingGPT
produce the results by accessing LLMs multiply
times. SWIFTSAGE [49], inspired by the dual-
process theory of human cognition [50], combines
the power of both SWIFT and SAGE modules for
planning in complex interactive tasks. The SWIFT
module provides quick responses based on learned
patterns, while the SAGE module, using large lan-
guage models, conducts in-depth planning by ask-

---PAGE BREAK---

[Page 11]
Lei Wang et al. A Survey on Large Language Model based Autonomous Agents 11
ing key questions and generating action sequences
to ensure successful task completion.
• Multi-path Reasoning. In this strategy, the
reasoning steps for generating the final plans are
organized into a tree-like structure. Each intermedi-
ate step may have multiple subsequent steps. This
approach is analogous to human thinking, as indi-
viduals may have multiple choices at each reasoning
step. In specific, Self-consistent CoT (CoT-SC) [51]
believes that each complex problem has multiple
ways of thinking to deduce the final answer. Thus, it
starts by employing CoT to generate various reason-
ing paths and corresponding answers. Subsequently,
the answer with the highest frequency is chosen
as the final output. Tree of Thoughts (ToT) [52]
is designed to generate plans using a tree-like rea-
soning structure. In this approach, each node in
the tree represents a "thought," which corresponds
to an intermediate reasoning step. The selection
of these intermediate steps is based on the evalu-
ation of LLMs. The final plan is generated using
either the breadth-first search (BFS) or depth-first
search (DFS) strategy. Comparing with CoT-SC,
which generates all the planed steps together, ToT
needs to query LLMs for each reasoning step. In
RecMind [53], the authors designed a self-inspiring
mechanism, where the discarded historical infor-
mation in the planning process is also leveraged
to derive new reasoning steps. In GoT [54], the
authors expand the tree-like reasoning structure in
ToT to graph structures, resulting in more power-
ful prompting strategies. In AoT [55], the authors
design a novel method to enhance the reasoning
processes of LLMs by incorporating algorithmic ex-
amples into the prompts. Remarkably, this method
only needs to query LLMs for only one or a few
times. In [44], the LLMs are leveraged as zero-shot
planners. At each planning step, they first generate
multiple possible next steps, and then determine
the final one based on their distances to admissible
actions. [56] further improves [44] by incorporat-
ing examples that are similar to the queries in the
prompts. RAP [57] builds a world model to simu-
late the potential benefits of di fferent plans based
on Monte Carlo Tree Search (MCTS), and then,
the final plan is generated by aggregating multiple
MCTS iterations. To enhance comprehension, we
provide an illustration comparing the strategies of
single-path and multi-path reasoning in Figure 3.
• External Planner. Despite the demonstrated
power of LLMs in zero-shot planning, e ffectively
generating plans for domain-specific problems re-
mains highly challenging. To address this challenge,
researchers turn to external planners. These tools
are well-developed and employ efficient search algo-
rithms to rapidly identify correct, or even optimal,
plans. In specific, LLM +P [58] first transforms
the task descriptions into formal Planning Domain
Definition Languages (PDDL), and then it uses an
external planner to deal with the PDDL. Finally, the
generated results are transformed back into natural
language by LLMs. Similarly, LLM-DP [59] uti-
lizes LLMs to convert the observations, the current
world state, and the target objectives into PDDL.
Subsequently, this transformed data is passed to
an external planner, which e fficiently determines
the final action sequence. CO-LLM [22] demon-
strates that LLMs is good at generating high-level
plans, but struggle with low-level control. To ad-
dress this limitation, a heuristically designed ex-
ternal low-level planner is employed to effectively
execute actions based on high-level plans.
Planning with Feedback: In many real-world
scenarios, the agents need to make long-horizon
planning to solve complex tasks. When facing these
tasks, the above planning modules without feedback

---PAGE BREAK---

[Page 12]
12 Front. Comput. Sci., 2025, 0(0): 1–42
can be less effective due to the following reasons:
firstly, generating a flawless plan directly from the
beginning is extremely difficult as it needs to con-
sider various complex preconditions. As a result,
simply following the initial plan often leads to fail-
ure. Moreover, the execution of the plan may be
hindered by unpredictable transition dynamics, ren-
dering the initial plan non-executable. Simultane-
ously, when examining how humans tackle complex
tasks, we find that individuals may iteratively make
and revise their plans based on external feedback.
To simulate such human capability, researchers have
designed many planning modules, where the agent
can receive feedback after taking actions. The feed-
back can be obtained from environments, humans,
and models, which are detailed in the following.
• Environmental Feedback. This feedback is
obtained from the objective world or virtual envi-
ronment. For instance, it could be the game’s task
completion signals or the observations made after
the agent takes an action. In specific, ReAct [60]
proposes constructing prompts using thought-act-
observation triplets. The thought component aims
to facilitate high-level reasoning and planning for
guiding agent behaviors. The act represents a spe-
cific action taken by the agent. The observation
corresponds to the outcome of the action, acquired
through external feedback, such as search engine
results. The next thought is influenced by the previ-
ous observations, which makes the generated plans
more adaptive to the environment. V oyager [38]
makes plans by incorporating three types of environ-
ment feedback including the intermediate progress
of program execution, the execution error and self-
verification results. These signals can help the agent
to make better plans for the next action. Similar to
V oyager, Ghost [16] also incorporates feedback into
the reasoning and action taking processes. This
feedback encompasses the environment states as
well as the success and failure information for each
executed action. SayPlan [31] leverages environ-
mental feedback derived from a scene graph sim-
ulator to validate and refine its strategic formula-
tions. This simulator is adept at discerning the
outcomes and state transitions subsequent to agent
actions, facilitating SayPlan’s iterative recalibra-
tion of its strategies until a viable plan is ascer-
tained. In DEPS [33], the authors argue that solely
providing information about the completion of a
task is often inadequate for correcting planning er-
rors. Therefore, they propose informing the agent
about the detail reasons for task failure, allowing
them to more effectively revise their plans. LLM-
Planner [61] introduces a grounded re-planning al-
gorithm that dynamically updates plans generated
by LLMs when encountering object mismatches and
unattainable plans during task completion. Inner
Monologue [62] provides three types of feedback
to the agent after it takes actions: (1) whether the
task is successfully completed, (2) passive scene
descriptions, and (3) active scene descriptions. The
former two are generated from the environments,
which makes the agent actions more reasonable.
• Human Feedback. In addition to obtaining
feedback from the environment, directly interact-
ing with humans is also a very intuitive strategy to
enhance the agent planning capability. The human
feedback is a subjective signal. It can e ffectively
make the agent align with the human values and
preferences, and also help to alleviate the hallucina-
tion problem. In Inner Monologue [62], the agent
aims to perform high-level natural language instruc-
tions in a 3D visual environment. It is given the
capability to actively solicit feedback from humans
regarding scene descriptions. Then, the agent in-
corporates the human feedback into its prompts,

---PAGE BREAK---

[Page 13]
Lei Wang et al. A Survey on Large Language Model based Autonomous Agents 13
enabling more informed planning and reasoning. In
the above cases, we can see, different types of feed-
back can be combined to enhance the agent plan-
ning capability. For example, Inner Monologue [62]
collects both environment and human feedback to
facilitate the agent plans.
• Model Feedback. Apart from the aforemen-
tioned environmental and human feedback, which
are external signals, researchers have also investi-
gated the utilization of internal feedback from the
agents themselves. This type of feedback is usu-
ally generated based on pre-trained models. In spe-
cific, [63] proposes a self-refine mechanism. This
mechanism consists of three crucial components:
output, feedback, and refinement. Firstly, the agent
generates an output. Then, it utilizes LLMs to pro-
vide feedback on the output and offer guidance on
how to refine it. At last, the output is improved by
the feedback and refinement. This output-feedback-
refinement process iterates until reaching some de-
sired conditions. SelfCheck [64] allows agents to
examine and evaluate their reasoning steps gener-
ated at various stages. They can then correct any er-
rors by comparing the outcomes. InterAct [65] uses
different language models (such as ChatGPT and
InstructGPT) as auxiliary roles, such as checkers
and sorters, to help the main language model avoid
erroneous and ine fficient actions. ChatCoT [66]
utilizes model feedback to improve the quality of
its reasoning process. The model feedback is gen-
erated by an evaluation module that monitors the
agent reasoning steps. Reflexion [12] is developed
to enhance the agent’s planning capability through
detailed verbal feedback. In this model, the agent
first produces an action based on its memory, and
then, the evaluator generates feedback by taking
the agent trajectory as input. In contrast to previ-
ous studies, where the feedback is given as a scalar
value, this model leverages LLMs to provide more
detailed verbal feedback, which can provide more
comprehensive supports for the agent plans.
Remark. In conclusion, the implementation of plan-
ning module without feedback is relatively straight-
forward. However, it is primarily suitable for simple
tasks that only require a small number of reason-
ing steps. Conversely, the strategy of planning with
feedback needs more careful designs to handle the
feedback. Nevertheless, it is considerably more
powerful and capable of effectively addressing com-
plex tasks that involve long-range reasoning.
2.1.4 Action Module
The action module is responsible for translating
the agent’s decisions into specific outcomes. This
module is located at the most downstream position
and directly interacts with the environment. It is
influenced by the profile, memory, and planning
modules. This section introduces the action module
from four perspectives: (1) Action goal: what are
the intended outcomes of the actions? (2) Action
production: how are the actions generated? (3)
Action space: what are the available actions? (4)
Action impact: what are the consequences of the
actions? Among these perspectives, the first two
focus on the aspects preceding the action ("before-
action" aspects), the third focuses on the action itself
("in-action" aspect), and the fourth emphasizes the
impact of the actions ("after-action" aspect).
Action Goal: The agent can perform actions with
various objectives. Here, we present several repre-
sentative examples: (1) Task Completion. In this
scenario, the agent’s actions are aimed at accom-
plishing specific tasks, such as crafting an iron pick-
axe in Minecraft [38] or completing a function in
software development [18]. These actions usually
have well-defined objectives, and each action con-

---PAGE BREAK---

[Page 14]
14 Front. Comput. Sci., 2025, 0(0): 1–42
tributes to the completion of the final task. Ac-
tions aimed at this type of goal are very common
in existing literature. (2) Communication. In this
case, the actions are taken to communicate with the
other agents or real humans for sharing informa-
tion or collaboration. For example, the agents in
ChatDev [18] may communicate with each other
to collectively accomplish software development
tasks. In Inner Monologue [62], the agent actively
engages in communication with humans and ad-
justs its action strategies based on human feedback.
(3) Environment Exploration. In this example, the
agent aims to explore unfamiliar environments to
expand its perception and strike a balance between
exploring and exploiting. For instance, the agent in
V oyager [38] may explore unknown skills in their
task completion process and continually refine the
skill execution code based on environment feedback
through trial and error.
Action Production: Different from ordinary LLMs,
where the model input and output are directly as-
sociated, the agent may take actions via di fferent
strategies and sources. In the following, we intro-
duce two types of commonly used action production
strategies. (1) Action via Memory Recollection. In
this strategy, the action is generated by extracting
information from the agent memory according to
the current task. The task and the extracted memo-
ries are used as prompts to trigger the agent actions.
For example, in Generative Agents [20], the agent
maintains a memory stream, and before taking each
action, it retrieves recent, relevant and important
information from the memory steam to guide the
agent actions. In GITM [16], in order to achieve a
low-level sub-goal, the agent queries its memory to
determine if there are any successful experiences
related to the task. If similar tasks have been com-
pleted previously, the agent invokes the previously
successful actions to handle the current task directly.
In collaborative agents such as ChatDev [18] and
MetaGPT [23], different agents may communicate
with each other. In this process, the conversation
history in a dialog is remembered in the agent mem-
ories. Each utterance generated by the agent is
influenced by its memory. (2) Action via Plan Fol-
lowing. In this strategy, the agent takes actions
following its pre-generated plans. For instance, in
DEPS [33], for a given task, the agent first makes
action plans. If there are no signals indicating plan
failure, the agent will strictly adhere to these plans.
In GITM [16], the agent makes high-level plans by
decomposing the task into many sub-goals. Based
on these plans, the agent takes actions to solve each
sub-goal sequentially to complete the final task.
Action Space: Action space refers to the set of
possible actions that can be performed by the agent.
In general, we can roughly divide these actions
into two classes: (1) external tools and (2) inter-
nal knowledge of the LLMs. In the following, we
introduce these actions more in detail.
• External Tools. While LLMs have been
demonstrated to be e ffective in accomplishing a
large amount of tasks, they may not work well
for the domains which need comprehensive expert
knowledge. In addition, LLMs may also encounter
hallucination problems, which are hard to be re-
solved by themselves. To alleviate the above prob-
lems, the agents are empowered with the capability
to call external tools for executing action. In the
following, we present several representative tools
which have been exploited in the literature.
(1) APIs. Leveraging external APIs to comple-
ment and expand action space is a popular paradigm
in recent years. For example, HuggingGPT [13] in-
tegrates HuggingFace’s vast model ecosystem to
tackle complex user tasks. Similarly, WebGPT [67]

---PAGE BREAK---

[Page 15]
Lei Wang et al. A Survey on Large Language Model based Autonomous Agents 15
proposes to automatically generate queries to ex-
tract relevant content from external web pages when
responding to user request. TPTU [68] explores the
potential of LLMs to address intricate tasks through
strategic task planning and API-based tools. Go-
rilla [69] introduces a fine-tuned LLM capable of
generating precise input arguments for API calls,
effectively mitigating hallucination issues during
external API usage. ToolFormer [15] employs self-
supervised learning to determine when and how
to invoke external tools, using demonstrations of
tool APIs for training. API-Bank [70] offers a com-
prehensive benchmark with a diverse collection of
API tools to systematically evaluate tool-augmented
LLMs, alongside robust training datasets designed
to enhance their integration capabilities. ToolL-
LaMA [14] proposes a tool-use framework encom-
passing data collection, training, and evaluation,
with the resulting fine-tuned model excelling across
a wide array of APIs. RestGPT [71] connects LLMs
with RESTful APIs, which follow widely accepted
standards for web services development, making the
resulting program more compatible with real-world
applications. TaskMatrix.AI [72] connects LLMs
with an extensive ecosystem of APIs to support
task execution. At its core lies a multimodal con-
versational foundational model that interacts with
users, understands their goals and context, and then
produces executable code for particular tasks. In
essence, these intelligent agents strategically har-
ness external APIs as versatile tools, systematically
expanding their action space and transcending the
inherent limitations of traditional language models
by integrating diverse computational capabilities.
(2) Databases & Knowledge Bases. Integrating
external database or knowledge base enables agents
to obtain specific domain information for generating
more realistic actions. For example, ChatDB [40]
employs SQL statements to query databases, facil-
itating actions by the agents in a logical manner.
MRKL [73] and OpenAGI [74] incorporate vari-
ous expert systems such as knowledge bases and
planners to access domain-specific information.
(3) External Models. Previous studies often uti-
lize external models to expand the range of possible
actions. In comparison to APIs, external models
typically handle more complex tasks. Each external
model may correspond to multiple APIs. For ex-
ample, ViperGPT [75] firstly uses Codex, which is
implemented based on language model, to generate
Python code from text descriptions, and then exe-
cutes the code to complete the given tasks. Chem-
Crow [76] is an LLM-based chemical agent de-
signed to perform tasks in organic synthesis, drug
discovery, and material design. It utilizes seven-
teen expert-designed models to assist its operations.
MM-REACT [77] integrates various external mod-
els, such as VideoBERT for video summarization,
X-decoder for image generation, and SpeechBERT
for audio processing, enhancing its capability in
diverse multimodal scenarios.
• Internal Knowledge. In addition to utilizing
external tools, many agents rely solely on the inter-
nal knowledge of LLMs to guide their actions. We
now present several crucial capabilities of LLMs
that can support the agent to behave reasonably
and effectively. (1) Planning Capability. Previous
work has demonstrated that LLMs can be used as
decent planners to decompose complex tasks into
simpler ones [45]. Such a capability of LLMs can
be even triggered without incorporating examples
in the prompts [46]. Building on the planning ca-
pability of LLMs, DEPS [33] develops a Minecraft
agent, which can solve complex tasks via sub-goal
decomposition. Similar agents like GITM [16] and
V oyager [38] also heavily rely on the planning ca-

---PAGE BREAK---

[Page 16]
16 Front. Comput. Sci., 2025, 0(0): 1–42
pability of LLMs to successfully complete various
tasks. (2) Conversation Capability. LLMs can usu-
ally generate high-quality conversations. This capa-
bility enables agents to behave more like humans. In
the previous work, many agents take actions based
on the strong conversation capability of LLMs. For
example, in ChatDev [18], different agents can dis-
cuss the software development process and reflect
on their own behaviors. In RLP [30], the agent
can communicate with the listeners based on their
potential feedback on the agent’s utterance. (3)
Common Sense Understanding Capability. Another
important capability of LLMs is that they can well
comprehend human common sense. Based on this
capability, many agents can simulate human daily
life and make human-like decisions. For example,
in Generative Agent [20], the agent can accurately
understand its current state, the surrounding envi-
ronment, and summarize high-level ideas based on
basic observations. Without the common sense un-
derstanding capability of LLMs, these behaviors
cannot be reliably simulated. Similar conclusions
may also apply to RecAgent [21] and S3 [78], where
the agents focus on simulating user social behaviors.
Action Impact: Action impact refers to the con-
sequences of an agent’s actions. While the range
of possible impacts is vast, we highlight a few key
examples for clarity: (1) Changing Environments.
Agents can directly alter environment states by ac-
tions, such as moving their positions, collecting
items, constructing buildings, etc. For instance, in
GITM [16] and V oyager [38], the environments are
changed by the actions of the agents in their task
completion process. Specifically, when an agent
collects resources—such as harvesting three pieces
of wood—the resources disappear from the environ-
ment. (2) Altering Internal States. Actions taken by
the agent can also change the agent itself, including
updating memories, forming new plans, acquiring
novel knowledge, and more. For example, in Gen-
erative Agents [20], memory streams are updated
after performing actions within the system. Simi-
larly, SayCan [79] enables agents to take actions to
update understandings of the environment. (3) Trig-
gering New Actions. In task completion processes,
one action often leads to subsequent actions. For ex-
ample, in V oyager [38], once the agent has gathered
the necessary resources, it triggers the construction
of buildings.
2.2 Agent Capability Acquisition
In the sections above, we focus mainly on how to
design the agent architecture to better harness the ca-
pabilities of LLMs to enabling them to accomplish
tasks akin to human performance. The architecture
functions as the “hardware” of an agent. However,
relying solely on the hardware is insu fficient for
achieving effective task performance. This is be-
cause the agent may lack the necessary task-specific
capabilities, skills, and experiences, which can be
regarded as "software" resources. In order to equip
the agent with these resources, various strategies
have been devised. Generally, we categorize these
strategies into two classes based on whether they re-
quire fine-tuning of the LLMs. Below, we introduce
each category in detail.
Capability Acquisition with Fine-tuning : A
direct approach to enhance agent capabilities for
task completion is to fine-tune the model using task-
specific datasets. These datasets can be constructed
from human annotations, LLM-generated content,
or real-world applications. We discuss these meth-
ods in detail below.
• Fine-tuning with Human Annotated Datasets.
To fine-tune the agent, utilizing human annotated
datasets is a versatile approach that can be employed

---PAGE BREAK---

[Page 17]
Lei Wang et al. A Survey on Large Language Model based Autonomous Agents 17
Table 1 For the profile module, we use ①, ② and ③ to represent the handcrafting method, LLM-generation method, and
dataset alignment method, respectively. For the memory module, we focus on the implementation strategies for memory
operation and memory structure. For memory operation, we use ① and ② to indicate that the model only has read/write
operations and has read/write/reflection operations, respectively. For memory structure, we use ① and ② to represent unified
and hybrid memories, respectively. For the planning module, we use ① and ② to represent planning w/o feedback and w/
feedback, respectively. For the action module, we use ① and ② to represent that the model does not use tools and use tools,
respectively. For the agent capability acquisition (CA) strategy, we use ① and ② to represent the methods with and without
fine-tuning, respectively. “-” indicates that the corresponding content is not explicitly discussed in the paper.
Model Profile Memory Planning Action CA TimeOperation Structure
WebGPT [67] - - - - ② ① 12/2021
SayCan [79] - - - ① ① ② 04/2022
MRKL [73] - - - ① ② - 05 /2022
Inner Monologue [62] - - - ② ① ② 07/2022
Social Simulacra [80] ② - - - ① - 08 /2022
ReAct [60] - - - ② ② ① 10/2022
MALLM [42] - ① ② - ① - 01 /2023
DEPS [33] - - - ② ① ② 02/2023
Toolformer [15] - - - ① ② ① 02/2023
Reflexion [12] - ② ② ② ① ② 03/2023
CAMEL [81] ① ② - - ② ① - 03 /2023
API-Bank [70] - - - ② ② ② 04/2023
ViperGPT [75] - - - - ② - 03 /2023
HuggingGPT [13] - ① ① ① ② - 03 /2023
Generative Agents [20] ① ② ② ② ① - 04 /2023
LLM+P [58] - - - ① ① - 04 /2023
ChemCrow [76] - - - ② ② - 04 /2023
OpenAGI [74] - - - ② ② ① 04/2023
AutoGPT [82] - ① ② ② ② ② 04/2023
SCM [35] - ② ② - ① - 04 /2023
Socially Alignment [83] - ① ② - ① ① 05/2023
GITM [16] - ② ② ② ① ② 05/2023
V oyager [38] - ② ② ② ① ② 05/2023
Introspective Tips [84] - - - ② ① ② 05/2023
RET-LLM [41] - ① ② - ① ① 05/2023
ChatDB [40] - ① ② ② ② - 06 /2023
S 3 [78] ③ ② ② - ① - 07 /2023
ChatDev [18] ① ② ② ② ① ② 07/2023
ToolLLM [14] - - - ② ② ① 07/2023
MemoryBank [39] - ② ② - ① - 07 /2023
MetaGPT [23] ① ② ② ② ② - 08 /2023
in various application scenarios. In this approach,
researchers first design annotation tasks and then
recruit workers to complete them. For example,
in CoH [85], the authors aim to align LLMs with
human values and preferences. Different from the
other models, where the human feedback is lever-
aged in a simple and symbolic manner, this method
converts the human feedback into detailed compar-
ison information in the form of natural languages.
The LLMs are directly fine-tuned based on these
natural language datasets. In RET-LLM [41], in
order to better convert natural languages into struc-
tured memory information, the authors fine-tune
LLMs based on a human constructed dataset, where
each sample is a “triplet-natural language” pair. In
WebShop [86], the authors collect 1.18 million real-
world products from amazon.com, and put them
onto a simulated e-commerce website, which con-

---PAGE BREAK---

[Page 18]
18 Front. Comput. Sci., 2025, 0(0): 1–42
tains several carefully designed human shopping
scenarios. Based on this website, the authors re-
cruit 13 workers to collect a real-human behavior
dataset. At last, three methods based on heuristic
rules, imitation learning and reinforcement learn-
ing are trained based on this dataset. Although the
authors do not fine-tune LLM-based agents, we be-
lieve that the dataset proposed in this paper holds im-
mense potential to enhance the capabilities of agents
in the field of web shopping. In EduChat [87], the
authors aim to enhance the educational functions
of LLMs, such as open-domain question answering,
essay assessment, Socratic teaching, and emotional
support. They fine-tune LLMs based on human
annotated datasets that cover various educational
scenarios and tasks.
• Fine-tuning with LLM Generated Datasets.
Building human-annotated datasets typically requires
recruiting people, which can be costly, especially
when dealing with large-scale annotation tasks. Con-
sidering that LLMs can achieve human-like capabil-
ities in a wide range of tasks, a natural idea is using
LLMs to accomplish the annotation task. While
the datasets produced from this method can be not
as perfect as the human annotated ones, it is much
cheaper, and can be leveraged to generate more sam-
ples. For example, in ToolBench [14], to enhance
the tool-using capability of open-source LLMs, the
authors collect 16,464 real-world APIs spanning
49 categories from the RapidAPI Hub. They used
these APIs to prompt ChatGPT to generate diverse
instructions, covering both single-tool and multi-
tool scenarios. Based on the obtained dataset, the
authors fine-tune LLaMA [9], and obtain significant
performance improvement in terms of tool using.
In [83], to empower the agent with social capability,
the authors design a sandbox, and deploy multiple
agents to interact with each other. Given a social
question, the central agent first generates initial re-
sponses. Then, it shares the responses to its nearby
agents for collecting their feedback. Based on the
feedback as well as its detailed explanations, the
central agent revise its initial responses to make
them more consistent with social norms. In this
process, the authors collect a large amount of agent
social interaction data, which is then leveraged to
fine-tune the LLMs.
• Fine-tuning with Real-world Datasets. In ad-
dition to building datasets based on human or LLM
annotations, directly using real-world datasets to
fine-tune the agent is also a common strategy. For
example, in MIND2WEB [88], the authors collect
a large amount of real-world datasets to enhance
the agent capability in the web domain. In con-
trast to prior studies, the dataset presented in this
paper encompasses diverse tasks, real-world sce-
narios, and comprehensive user interaction patterns.
Specifically, the authors collect over 2,000 open-
ended tasks from 137 real-world websites spanning
31 domains. Using this dataset, the authors fine-
tune LLMs to enhance their performance on web-
related tasks such as movie discovery and ticket
booking. Similarly, in SQL-PaLM [89], researchers
fine-tune PaLM-2 using cross-domain, large-scale
text-to-SQL datasets, including Spider and BIRD.
The resulting model achieves notable performance
improvements on text-to-SQL tasks, demonstrating
the effectiveness of real-world datasets for domain-
specific applications.
Capability Acquisition without Fine-tuning: In
the era of tradition machine learning, the model ca-
pability is mainly acquired by learning from datasets,
where the knowledge is encoded into the model pa-
rameters. In the era of LLMs, the model capability
can be acquired either by training /fine-tuning the
model parameters or designing delicate prompts

---PAGE BREAK---

[Page 19]
Lei Wang et al. A Survey on Large Language Model based Autonomous Agents 19
Model
Output
Input
Dataset
Parameter Learning
The era of machine learning
Parameter Learning
The era of large language model
Prompt Engineering
The era of agent
Mechanism Engineering
Prompt Engineering
Model Parameters Capability
Model
Capability
Parameter Learning
Model
Output
Capability
Prompts
Classify the text into 
neutral, negative or 
positive. Text: I think 
the food was okay. 
Sentiment:
Neutral
Agent relevant Prompts Output
Crowd-
sourcing
Trial-and-
Error
Fig. 4 Illustration of transitions in strategies for acquiring model capabilities.
(i.e., prompt engineering). In prompt engineering,
one needs to write valuable information into the
prompts to enhance the model capability or unleash
existing LLM capabilities. In the era of agents, the
model capability can be acquired based on three
strategies: (1) model fine-tuning, (2) prompt engi-
neering and (3) designing proper agent evolution
mechanisms (we called it as mechanism engineer-
ing). Mechanism engineering is a broad concept
that involves developing specialized modules, in-
troducing novel working rules, and other strategies
to enhance agent capabilities. For clearly under-
standing the transitions of model capability acqui-
sition strategies, we illustrate them in Figure 4. In
the following, we detail prompting engineering and
mechanism engineering.
• Prompting Engineering. Due to the strong
language comprehension capabilities, people can di-
rectly interact with LLMs using natural languages.
This introduces a novel strategy for enhancing agent
capabilities, that is, one can describe the desired ca-
pability using natural language and then use it as
prompts to influence LLM actions. For example, in
CoT [45], in order to empower the agent with the
capability for complex task reasoning, the authors
present the intermediate reasoning steps as few-shot
examples in the prompt. Similar techniques are also
used in CoT-SC [51] and ToT [52]. In RLP [30], the
authors aim to enhance an agent’s self-awareness in
conversations by prompting LLMs with the agent’s
beliefs about both its own and the listeners’ men-
tal states. This approach results in more engaging
and adaptive utterances. Furthermore, the incorpo-
ration of the target mental states of listeners allows
the agent to formulate more strategic plans. Retro-
former [90] presents a retrospective model that en-
ables the agent to generate reflections on its past fail-
ures. The reflections are integrated into the prompt
of LLMs to guide the agent’s future actions. Ad-
ditionally, this model utilizes reinforcement learn-
ing to iteratively improve the retrospective model,
thereby refining the LLM prompt.
• Mechanism Engineering. Unlike model fine-
tuning and prompt engineering, mechanism engi-
neering is a unique strategy to enhance agent capa-
bility. In the following, we present several represen-
tative methods of mechanism engineering.
(1) Trial-and-error.In this method, the agent first
performs an action, and subsequently, a pre-defined
critic is invoked to judge the action. If the action
is deemed unsatisfactory, then the agent reacts by
incorporating the critic’s feedback. For example, in

---PAGE BREAK---

[Page 20]
20 Front. Comput. Sci., 2025, 0(0): 1–42
RAH [91], the agent serves as a user assistant in
recommender systems. One of the agent’s crucial
roles is to simulate human behavior and generate
responses on behalf of the user. To fulfill this objec-
tive, the agent first generates a predicted response
and then compares it with the real human feedback.
If the predicted response and the real human feed-
back differ, the critic generates failure information,
which is subsequently incorporated into the agent’s
next action. Similarly, in DEPS [33], the agent
first designs a plan to accomplish a given task. In
the plan execution process, if an action fails, the
explainer generates specific details explaining the
cause of the failure. This information is then in-
corporated by the agent to redesign the plan. In
RoCo [92], the agent first proposes a sub-task plan
and a path of 3D waypoints for each robot in a multi-
robot collaboration task. The plan and waypoints
are then validated by a set of environment checks,
such as collision detection and inverse kinematics.
If any of the checks fail, the feedback is appended to
each agent’s prompt and another round of dialog be-
gins. The agents use LLMs to discuss and improve
their plan and waypoints until they pass all valida-
tions. PREFER [93] extends this idea by leveraging
LLMs to generate detailed feedback when the agent
underperforms, enabling iterative refinement and
performance improvement.
(2) Crowd-sourcing. In [94], the authors design
a debating mechanism that leverages the wisdom
of crowds to enhance agent capabilities. To begin
with, different agents provide separate responses to
a given question. If their responses are not consis-
tent, they will be prompted to incorporate the solu-
tions from other agents and provide an updated re-
sponse. This iterative process continues until reach-
ing a final consensus answer. In this method, the
capability of each agent is enhanced by understand-
ing and incorporating the other agents’ opinions.
(3) Experience Accumulation. In GITM [16], the
agent does not know how to solve a task in the begin-
ning. Then, it makes explorations, and once it has
successfully accomplished a task, the actions used
in this task are stored into the agent memory. In the
future, if the agent encounters a similar task, then
the relevant memories are extracted to complete the
current task. In this process, the improved agent
capability comes from the specially designed mem-
ory accumulation and utilization mechanisms. V oy-
ager [38] introduces a skill library, where executable
codes for specific skills are refined through interac-
tions with the environment, enabling efficient task
execution over time. In AppAgent [95], the agent is
designed to interact with apps in a manner akin to
human users, learning through both autonomous ex-
ploration and observation of human demonstrations.
Throughout this process, it constructs a knowledge
base, which serves as a reference for performing in-
tricate tasks across various applications on a mobile
phone. In MemPrompt [96], the users are requested
to provide feedback in natural language regarding
the problem-solving intentions of the agent, and this
feedback is stored in memory. When the agent en-
counters similar tasks, it attempts to retrieve related
memories to generate more suitable responses.
(4) Self-driven Evolution. This method allows
agents to autonomously improve through self-directed
learning and feedback mechanisms. LMA3 [97]
enables the agent to autonomously set goals for it-
self, and gradually improve its capability by explor-
ing the environment and receiving feedback from
a reward function. Following this mechanism, the
agent can acquire knowledge and develop capabil-
ities according to its own preferences. SALLM-
MS [98] integrates advanced LLMs like GPT-4 into
a multi-agent system, agents can adapt and perform

---PAGE BREAK---

[Page 21]
Lei Wang et al. A Survey on Large Language Model based Autonomous Agents 21
complex tasks, showcasing advanced communica-
tion capabilities, thereby realizing self-driven evo-
lution in their interactions with the environment. In
CLMTWA [99], by using a large language model
as a teacher and a weaker language model as a stu-
dent, the teacher can generate and communicate
natural language explanations to improve the stu-
dent’s reasoning skills via theory of mind. The
teacher can also personalize its explanations for the
student and intervene only when necessary, based
on the expected utility of intervention. Meanwhile,
NLSOM [100],leverages natural language collabo-
ration between agents, dynamically adjusting roles,
tasks, and relationships based on feedback to solve
problems beyond the scope of a single agent.
Remark. Upon comparing the aforementioned strate-
gies for agent capability acquisition, we can find
that the fine-tuning method improves the agent ca-
pability by adjusting model parameters, which can
incorporate a large amount of task-specific knowl-
edge, but is only suitable for open-source LLMs.
The method without fine-tuning usually enhances
the agent capability based on delicate prompting
strategies or mechanism engineering. They can
be used for both open- and closed-source LLMs.
However, due to the limitation of the input context
window of LLMs, they cannot incorporate too much
task information. In addition, the designing spaces
of the prompts and mechanisms are extremely large,
which makes it not easy to find optimal solutions.
In the above sections, we have detailed the con-
struction of LLM-based agents, where we focus on
two aspects including the architecture design and ca-
pability acquisition. We present the correspondence
between existing work and the above taxonomy in
Table 1. It should be noted that, for the sake of
integrity, we have also incorporated several studies,
which do not explicitly mention LLM-based agents
but are highly related to this area.
3 LLM-based Autonomous Agent Ap-
plication
Owing to the strong language comprehension, com-
plex task reasoning, and common sense understand-
ing capabilities, LLM-based autonomous agents
have shown significant potential to influence mul-
tiple domains. This section provides a succinct
summary of previous studies, categorizing them ac-
cording to their applications in three distinct areas:
social science, natural science, and engineering (see
the left part of Figure 5 for a global overview).
3.1 Social Science
Social science is one of the branches of science, de-
voted to the study of societies and the relationships
among individuals within those societies. LLM-
based autonomous agents can promote this domain
by leveraging their impressive human-like under-
standing, thinking and task solving capabilities. In
the following, we discuss several key areas that can
be affected by LLM-based autonomous agents.
Psychology: For the domain of psychology, LLM-
based agents can be leveraged for conducting simu-
lation experiments, providing mental health support
and so on [101 –104]. For example, in [101], the
authors assign LLMs with di fferent profiles, and
let them complete psychology experiments. From
the results, the authors find that LLMs are capa-
ble of generating results that align with those from
studies involving human participants. Additionally,
it was observed that larger models tend to deliver
more accurate simulation results compared to their
smaller counterparts. An interesting discovery is
that, in many experiments, models like ChatGPT
and GPT-4 can provide too perfect estimates (called

---PAGE BREAK---

[Page 22]
22 Front. Comput. Sci., 2025, 0(0): 1–42
SocialScience
NaturalScience
Engineering
ØPsychology
ØPolitical Science and Economy
ØSocial Simulation
ØDocumentation and Data Management
ØNatural Science Experiment Assistant
ØNatural Science Education
ØCivil Engineering
ØComputer Science
ØAerospace Engineering
ØJurisprudence
ØSocial Science
ØResearch Assistant
ØIndustrial Automation
ØRobotics & Embodied AI
SubjectiveEvaluation
ØHumanAnnotation
ØTuringTest
ObjectiveEvaluation
ØEvaluation Metric
ØEvaluation Protocol
ØEvaluation Benchmark
Application
Evaluation
Fig. 5 The applications (left) and evaluation strategies (right) of LLM-based agents.
“hyper-accuracy distortion”), which may influence
the downstream applications. In [103], the authors
systematically analyze the e ffectiveness of LLM-
based conversation agents for mental well-being
support. They collect 120 posts from Reddit, and
find that such agents can help users cope with anx-
ieties, social isolation and depression on demand.
At the same time, they also find that the agents may
produce harmful contents sometimes.
Political Science and Economy : LLM-based
agents can also be utilized to study political science
and economy [29, 104, 105]. In [29], LLM-based
agents are utilized for ideology detection and pre-
dicting voting patterns. In [104], the authors focuses
on understanding the discourse structure and per-
suasive elements of political speech through the
assistance of LLM-based agents. In [105], LLM-
based agents are provided with specific traits such
as talents, preferences, and personalities to explore
human economic behaviors in simulated scenarios.
Social Simulation: Previously, conducting ex-
periments with human societies is often expensive,
unethical, or even infeasible. With the ever pros-
pering of LLMs, many people explore to build vir-
tual environment with LLM-based agents to sim-
ulate social phenomena, such as the propagation
of harmful information, and so on [20, 34, 78, 80,
106–109]. For example, Social Simulacra [80] sim-
ulates an online social community and explores
the potential of utilizing agent-based simulations
to aid decision-makers to improve community regu-
lations. [106,107] investigates the potential impacts
of different behavioral characteristics of LLM-based
agents in social networks. Generative Agents [20]
and AgentSims [34] construct multiple agents in a
virtual town to simulate the human daily life. So-
cialAI School [108] employs LLM-based agents to
simulate and investigate the fundamental social cog-
nitive skills during the course of child development.
S3 [78] builds a social network simulator, focusing
on the propagation of information, emotion and atti-
tude. CGMI [110] is a framework for multi-agent
simulation. CGMI maintains the personality of the
agents through a tree structure and constructs a cog-
nitive model. The authors simulated a classroom
scenario using CGMI.
Jurisprudence: LLM-based agents can serve as
aids in legal decision-making processes, facilitat-
ing more informed judgements [111, 112]. Blind
Judgement [112] employs several language mod-
els to simulate the decision-making processes of
multiple judges. It gathers diverse opinions and
consolidates the outcomes through a voting mech-
anism. ChatLaw [111] is a prominent Chinese le-

---PAGE BREAK---

[Page 23]
Lei Wang et al. A Survey on Large Language Model based Autonomous Agents 23
gal model based on LLM. It adeptly supports both
database and keyword search strategies, specifically
designed to mitigate the hallucination issue preva-
lent in such models. In addition, this model also
employs self-attention mechanism to enhance the
LLM’s capability via mitigating the impact of refer-
ence inaccuracies.
Research Assistant: Beyond their application in
specialized domains, LLM-based agents are increas-
ingly adopted as versatile assistants in the broad
field of social science research [104, 113]. In [104],
LLM-based agents o ffer multifaceted assistance,
ranging from generating concise article abstracts
and extracting pivotal keywords to crafting detailed
scripts for studies, showcasing their ability to enrich
and streamline the research process. Meanwhile,
in [113], LLM-based agents serve as a writing assis-
tant, demonstrating their capability to identify novel
research inquiries for social scientists, thereby open-
ing new avenues for exploration and innovation in
the field. These examples highlight the potential
of LLM-based agents in enhancing the e fficiency,
creativity, and breadth of social science research.
3.2 Natural Science
Natural science is one of the branches of science
concerned with the description, understanding and
prediction of natural phenomena, based on empir-
ical evidence from observation and experimenta-
tion. With the ever prospering of LLMs, the ap-
plication of LLM-based agents in natural sciences
becomes more and more popular. In the follow-
ing, we present many representative areas, where
LLM-based agents can play important roles.
Documentation and Data Management: Natu-
ral scientific research often involves the collection,
organization, and synthesis of substantial amounts
of literature, which requires a significant dedication
of time and human resources. LLM-based agents
have shown strong capabilities on language under-
standing and employing tools such as the internet
and databases for text processing. These capabil-
ities empower the agent to excel in tasks related
to documentation and data management. In [114],
the agent can efficiently query and utilize internet
information to complete tasks such as question an-
swering and experiment planning. ChatMOF [115]
utilizes LLMs to extract important information from
text descriptions written by humans. It then for-
mulates a plan to apply relevant tools for predict-
ing the properties and structures of metal-organic
frameworks. ChemCrow [76] utilizes chemistry-
related databases to both validate the precision of
compound representations and identify potentially
dangerous substances. This functionality enhances
the reliability and comprehensiveness of scientific
inquiries by ensuring the accuracy of the data in-
volved.
Experiment Assistant: LLM-based agents have
the ability to independently conduct experiments,
making them valuable tools for supporting scien-
tists in their research projects [76,114]. For instance,
[114] introduces an innovative agent system that uti-
lizes LLMs for automating the design, planning, and
execution of scientific experiments. This system,
when provided with the experimental objectives as
input, accesses the Internet and retrieves relevant
documents to gather the necessary information. It
subsequently utilizes Python code to conduct essen-
tial calculations and carry out the following exper-
iments. ChemCrow [76] incorporates 17 carefully
developed tools that are specifically designed to as-
sist researchers in their chemical research. Once the
input objectives are received, ChemCrow provides
valuable recommendations for experimental proce-
dures, while also emphasizing any potential safety

---PAGE BREAK---

[Page 24]
24 Front. Comput. Sci., 2025, 0(0): 1–42
risks associated with the proposed experiments.
Natural Science Education: LLM-based agents
can communicate with humans fluently, often being
utilized to develop agent-based educational tools.
For example, [114] develops agent-based education
systems to facilitate students learning of experimen-
tal design, methodologies, and analysis. The objec-
tive of these systems is to enhance students’ critical
thinking and problem-solving skills, while also fos-
tering a deeper comprehension of scientific princi-
ples. Math Agents [116] can assist researchers in
exploring, discovering, solving and proving mathe-
matical problems. Additionally, it can communicate
with humans and aids them in understanding and
using mathematics. [117] utilize the capabilities
of CodeX [118] to automatically solve and explain
university-level mathematical problems, which can
be used as education tools to teach students and re-
searchers. CodeHelp [119] is an education agent for
programming. It offers many useful features, such
as setting course-specific keywords, monitoring stu-
dent queries, and providing feedback to the sys-
tem. EduChat [87] is an LLM-based agent designed
specifically for the education domain. It provides
personalized, equitable, and empathetic educational
support to teachers, students, and parents through
dialogue. FreeText [120] is an agent that utilizes
LLMs to automatically assess students’ responses
to open-ended questions and offer feedback.
3.3 Engineering
LLM-based autonomous agents have shown great
potential in assisting and enhancing engineering
research and applications. In this section, we re-
view and summarize the applications of LLM-based
agents in several major engineering domains.
Computer Science & Software Engineering:
In the field of computer science and software en-
gineering, LLM-based agents o ffer potential for
automating coding, testing, debugging, and doc-
umentation generation [18, 23, 24, 126–128]. Chat-
Dev [18] proposes an end-to-end framework, where
multiple agent roles communicate and collaborate
through natural language conversations to complete
the software development life cycle. This frame-
work demonstrates efficient and cost-effective gener-
ation of executable software systems. MetaGPT [23]
abstracts multiple roles, such as product managers,
architects, project managers, and engineers, to su-
pervise code generation process and enhance the
quality of the final output code. This enables low-
cost software development. [24] presents a self-
collaboration framework for code generation us-
ing LLMs. In this framework, multiple LLMs are
assumed to be distinct "experts" for specific sub-
tasks. They collaborate and interact according to
specified instructions, forming a virtual team that
facilitates each other’s work. Ultimately, the vir-
tual team collaboratively addresses code genera-
tion tasks without requiring human intervention.
LLIFT [141] employs LLMs to assist in conducting
static analysis, specifically for identifying potential
code vulnerabilities. This approach effectively man-
ages the trade-off between accuracy and scalability.
ChatEDA [123] is an agent developed for electronic
design automation (EDA) to streamline the design
process by integrating task planning, script gener-
ation, and execution. CodeHelp [119] is an agent
designed to assist students and developers in debug-
ging and testing their code. Its features include pro-
viding detailed explanations of error messages, sug-
gesting potential fixes, and ensuring the accuracy
of the code. Pentest [125] is a penetration testing
tool based on LLMs, which can effectively identify
common vulnerabilities, and interpret source code
to develop exploits. D-Bot [122] utilizes the capa-

---PAGE BREAK---

[Page 25]
Lei Wang et al. A Survey on Large Language Model based Autonomous Agents 25
Table 2 Representative applications of LLM-based autonomous agents.
Domain Work
Psychology TE [101], Akata et al. [102], Ziems et al. [104], Ma et al. [103]
Social Science
Political Science and Economy Argyle et al. [29], Horton [105], Ziems et al. [104]
Social Simulation
Social Simulacra [80], Generative Agents [20], SocialAI
School [108], AgentSims [34], S3 [78], Williams et al. [109], Li
et al. [106], Chao et al. [107]
Jurisprudence ChatLaw [111], Blind Judgement [112]
Research Assistant Ziems et al. [104], Bail et al. [113]
Documentation and
Data Management ChemCrow [76], ChatMOF [115], Boiko et al. [114]
Natural Science Experiment Assistant ChemCrow [76], Boiko et al. [114], Grossmann et al. [121]
Natural Science Education ChemCrow [76], CodeHelp [119], Boiko et al. [114], MathA-
gent [116], Drori et al. [117], EduChat [87], FreeText [120]
Engineering
CS & SE
RestGPT [71], Self-collaboration [24], SQL-PALM [89],
RAH [91], D-Bot [122], RecMind [53], ChatEDA [123],
InteRecAgent [124], PentestGPT [125], CodeHelp [119],
SmolModels [126], DemoGPT [127], GPTEngineer [128]
Industrial Automation GPT4IA [129], IELLM [130]
Robotics & Embodied AI
ProAgent [131], LLM4RL [132], PET [133], REMEM-
BERER [134], DEPS [33], Unified Agent [135], SayCan [79],
TidyBot [136], RoCo [92], SayPlan [31], TaPA [137], Dasgupta
et al. [138], DECKARD [139], Dialogue shaping [140]
bilities of LLMs to systematically assess potential
root causes of anomalies in databases. Through the
implementation of a tree of thought approach, D-
Bot enables LLMs to backtrack to previous steps
in case the current step proves unsuccessful, thus
enhancing the accuracy of the diagnosis process.
Industrial Automation: In the field of indus-
trial automation, LLM-based agents can be used to
achieve intelligent planning and control of produc-
tion processes. [129] proposes a novel framework
that integrates LLMs with digital twin systems to
accommodate flexible production needs. The frame-
work leverages prompt engineering techniques to
create LLM agents that can adapt to specific tasks
based on the information provided by digital twins.
These agents can coordinate a series of atomic func-
tionalities and skills to complete production tasks
at different levels. This research demonstrates the
potential of integrating LLMs into industrial au-
tomation systems, providing innovative solutions
for more agile, flexible and adaptive production pro-
cesses. IELLM [130] showcases a case study on
LLMs’ role in the oil and gas industry, covering
applications like factory automation and PLC pro-
gramming.
Robotics & Embodied Artificial Intelligence:
Recent works have advanced the development of
more e fficient reinforcement learning agents for

---PAGE BREAK---

[Page 26]
26 Front. Comput. Sci., 2025, 0(0): 1–42
robotics and embodied artificial intelligence [16,
38, 79, 132–135, 137–140]. These efforts focus on
enhancing autonomous agents’ capabilities in plan-
ning, reasoning, and collaboration within embod-
ied environments. For instance, [138] proposes the
Planner-Actor-Reporter paradigm for embodied rea-
soning and task planning. DECKARD [139] intro-
duces the Planner-Actor-Reporter paradigm, which
facilitates embodied reasoning and task planning
by decoupling the agent’s planning, execution, and
reporting processes. TaPA [137] constructs a multi-
modal dataset comprising multi-view RGB images
of indoor scenes, human instructions, and corre-
sponding plans to fine-tune LLMs. The fine-tuned
models align visual perception with task planning,
enabling them to generate more executable plans
and significantly improving their performance in
visually grounded tasks.
To overcome the physical constraints, the agents
can generate executable plans and accomplish long-
term tasks by leveraging multiple skills. In terms
of control policies, SayCan [79] focuses on investi-
gating a wide range of manipulation and navigation
skills utilizing a mobile manipulator robot. Tak-
ing inspiration from typical tasks encountered in a
kitchen environment, it presents a comprehensive
set of 551 skills that cover seven skill families and
17 objects. These skills encompass various actions
such as picking, placing, grasping, and manipulat-
ing objects, among others. TidyBot [136] is an
embodied agent designed to personalize household
cleanup tasks. It can learn users’ preferences on ob-
ject placement and manipulation methods through
textual examples.
To promote the application of LLM-based au-
tonomous agents, researchers have also introduced
many open-source libraries, based on which the de-
velopers can quickly implement and evaluate agents
according to their customized requirements [19, 82,
127, 142–155]. For example, LangChain [147] is an
open-source framework that automates coding, test-
ing, debugging, and documentation generation tasks.
By integrating language models with data sources
and facilitating interaction with the environment,
LangChain enables efficient and cost-effective soft-
ware development through natural language com-
munication and collaboration among multiple agent
roles. Based on LangChain, XLang [145] provides
a comprehensive set of tools and a fully integrated
user interface. It focuses on executable language
grounding, enabling the conversion of natural lan-
guage instructions into code or action sequences
that interact seamlessly with various environments,
including databases, web applications, and physi-
cal robots. AutoGPT [82] is an agent that is fully
automated. It sets one or more goals, breaks them
down into corresponding tasks, and cycles through
the tasks until the goal is achieved. WorkGPT [148]
is an agent framework similar to AutoGPT and
LangChain. By providing it with an instruction
and a set of APIs, it engages in back-and-forth
conversations with AI until the instruction is com-
pleted. GPT-Engineer [128] and DemoGPT [127]
are open-source projects that focus on automating
code generation through prompts to complete de-
velopment tasks. SmolModels [126] offers a family
of compact language models suitable for various
tasks. AGiXT [144] is a dynamic AI automation
platform that efficiently manages instructions and
executes complex tasks across various AI providers,
integrating adaptive memory, smart features, and
a versatile plugin system. AgentVerse [156] is a
versatile framework that facilitates researchers in
creating customized LLM-based agent simulations
efficiently. GPT Researcher [150] is an experimen-
tal application that leverages LLMs to e fficiently

---PAGE BREAK---

[Page 27]
Lei Wang et al. A Survey on Large Language Model based Autonomous Agents 27
develop research questions, trigger web crawls to
gather information, summarize sources, and aggre-
gate summaries. BMTools [151] provides a plat-
form for community-driven tool building and shar-
ing. It supports various types of tools, enables si-
multaneous task execution using multiple tools, and
offers a simple interface for loading plugins via
URLs, fostering easy development and contribution
to the BMTools ecosystem.
Remark. Utilization of LLM-based agents in sup-
porting above applications may also entail risks and
challenges. On one hand, LLMs themselves may
be susceptible to illusions and other issues, occa-
sionally providing erroneous answers, leading to in-
correct conclusions, experimental failures, or even
posing risks to human safety in hazardous exper-
iments. Therefore, during experimentation, users
must possess the necessary expertise and knowledge
to exercise appropriate caution. On the other hand,
LLM-based agents could potentially be exploited
for malicious purposes, such as the development of
chemical weapons, necessitating the implementa-
tion of security measures, such as human alignment,
to ensure responsible and ethical use.
In summary, in the above sections, we introduce
the typical applications of LLM-based autonomous
agents in three important domains. To facilitate
a clearer understanding, we have summarized the
relationship between previous studies and their re-
spective applications in Table 2.
4 LLM-based Autonomous Agent Eval-
uation
Similar to LLMs themselves, evaluating the effec-
tiveness of LLM-based autonomous agents is a chal-
lenging task. This section outlines two prevalent
approaches to evaluation: subjective and objective
methods. For a comprehensive overview, please
refer to the right portion of Figure 5.
4.1 Subjective Evaluation
Subjective evaluation measures the agent capabili-
ties based on human judgements [20,22,29,80,157].
It is suitable for the scenarios where there are no
evaluation datasets or it is very hard to design quan-
titative metrics, for example, evaluating the agent’s
intelligence or user-friendliness. In the following,
we present two commonly used strategies for sub-
jective evaluation.
Human Annotation: This evaluation method in-
volves human evaluators directly scoring or ranking
the outputs generated by various agents [22,29,104].
For example, in [20], the authors engage numerous
annotators by asking 25 questions that explore their
abilities across five key areas directly related to
agent capabilities. In [80], annotators are asked to
determine whether the specifically designed models
can significantly enhance the development of rules
within online communities.
Turing Test: This evaluation strategy necessi-
tates that human evaluators di fferentiate between
outputs produced by agents and those created by hu-
mans. If, in a given task, the evaluators cannot sep-
arate the agent and human results, it demonstrates
that the agent can achieve human-like performance
on this task. For instance, researchers in [29] con-
duct experiments on free-form Partisan text, and the
human evaluators are asked to guess whether the
responses are from human or LLM-based agent.
Remark. LLM-based agents are usually designed
to serve humans. Thus, subjective agent evaluation
plays a critical role, since it reflects human criterion.
However, this strategy also faces issues such as high
costs, inefficiency, and population bias. To address
these issues, a growing number of researchers are in-

---PAGE BREAK---

[Page 28]
28 Front. Comput. Sci., 2025, 0(0): 1–42
vestigating the use of LLMs themselves as interme-
diaries for carrying out these subjective assessments.
For example, in ChemCrow [76], researchers assess
the experimental results using GPT. They consider
both the completion of tasks and the accuracy of
the underlying processes. Similarly, ChatEval [158]
introduces a novel approach by employing multiple
agents to critique and assess the results generated
by various candidate models in a structured debate
format. This innovative use of LLMs for evaluation
purposes holds promise for enhancing both the cred-
ibility and applicability of subjective assessments in
the future. As LLM technology continues to evolve,
it is anticipated that these methods will become in-
creasingly reliable and find broader applications,
thereby overcoming the current limitations of direct
human evaluation.
4.2 Objective Evaluation
Objective evaluation refers to assessing the capabili-
ties of LLM-based autonomous agents using quanti-
tative metrics that can be computed, compared and
tracked over time. In contrast to subjective eval-
uation, objective metrics aim to provide concrete,
measurable insights into the agent performance. For
conducting objective evaluation, there are three im-
portant aspects, that is, the evaluation metrics, pro-
tocols and benchmarks. In the following, we intro-
duce these aspects more in detail.
Metrics: In order to objectively evaluate the ef-
fectiveness of the agents, designing proper met-
rics is significant, which may influence the eval-
uation accuracy and comprehensiveness. Ideal eval-
uation metrics should precisely reflect the quality
of the agents, and align with the human feelings
when using them in real-world scenarios. In ex-
isting work, we can conclude the following rep-
resentative evaluation metrics. (1) Task success
metrics: These metrics measure how well an agent
can complete tasks and achieve goals. Common
metrics include success rate [12, 22, 58, 60], re-
ward/score [22, 60, 161], coverage [16], and ac-
curacy/error rate [18, 40, 80, 101]. Depending on
the scenario, accuracy may reflect aspects such as
program executability [18] or task validity [101].
Higher values across these task success metrics in-
dicate greater task completion ability. (2) Human
similarity metrics: These metrics quantify the de-
gree to which the agent behaviors closely resembles
those of humans by emphasizing various aspects
related to human traits, such as coherent [104], flu-
ent [104], dialogue similarities with human [80]
and human acceptance rate [101]. Higher similar-
ity suggests better human simulation performance.
(3) Efficiency metrics: In contrast to the aforemen-
tioned metrics used to evaluate the agent effective-
ness, these metrics aim to assess the e fficiency of
agent. Commonly considered metrics encompass
the cost associated with development [18] and train-
ing efficiency [16, 38].
Protocols: In addition to the evaluation metrics,
another important aspect for objective evaluation
is how to leverage these metrics. In the previous
work, we can identify the following commonly used
evaluation protocols: (1) Real-world simulation: In
this method, the agents are evaluated within immer-
sive environments like games and interactive sim-
ulators. The agents are required to perform tasks
autonomously, and then metrics like task success
rate and human similarity are leveraged to evaluate
the capability of the agents based on their trajec-
tories and completed objectives [12, 16, 22, 33, 38,
60, 86, 161, 164, 168]. By simulating real-world
scenarios, this approach aims to provide a compre-
hensive evaluation of the agents’ practical capabil-
ities. (2) Social evaluation: This method utilizes

---PAGE BREAK---

[Page 29]
Lei Wang et al. A Survey on Large Language Model based Autonomous Agents 29
Table 3 For subjective evaluation, we use ① and ② to represent human annotation and the Turing test, respectively. For
objective evaluation, we use ①, ②, ③, and ④ to represent real-world simulation, social evaluation, multi-task evaluation, and
software testing, respectively. “✓” indicates that the evaluations are based on benchmarks.
Model Subjective Objective Benchmark Time
WebShop [86] - ① ③ ✓ 07/2022
Social Simulacra [80] ① ② - 08 /2022
TE [101] - ② - 08 /2022
LIBRO [159] - ④ - 09 /2022
ReAct [60] - ① ✓ 10/2022
Argyle et al. [29] ② ② ③ - 02 /2023
DEPS [33] - ① ✓ 02/2023
Jalil et al. [160] - ④ - 02 /2023
Reflexion [12] - ① ③ - 03 /2023
IGLU [161] - ① ✓ 04/2023
Generative Agents [20] ① - - 04 /2023
ToolBench [151] - ③ ✓ 04/2023
GITM [16] - ① ✓ 05/2023
Two-Failures [162] - ③ - 05 /2023
V oyager [38] - ① ✓ 05/2023
SocKET [163] - ② ③ ✓ 05/2023
MobileEnv [164] - ① ③ ✓ 05/2023
Clembench [165] - ① ③ ✓ 05/2023
Dialop [166] - ③ ✓ 06/2023
Feldt et al. [167] - ④ - 06 /2023
CO-LLM [22] ① ① - 07 /2023
Tachikuma [168] ① ① ③ ✓ 07/2023
RocoBench [92] - ① ③ ✓ 07/2023
AgentSims [34] - ② - 08 /2023
AgentBench [169] - ③ ✓ 08/2023
BOLAA [170] - ③ ✓ 08/2023
Gentopia [171] - ③ ✓ 08/2023
EmotionBench [172] ① - ✓ 08/2023
PTB [125] - ④ - 08 /2023
metrics to assess social intelligence based on the
agent interactions in simulated societies. Various
approaches have been adopted, such as collabora-
tive tasks to evaluate teamwork skills, debates to
analyze argumentative reasoning, and human stud-
ies to measure social aptitude [34, 80, 101, 163].
These approaches analyze qualities such as coher-
ence, theory of mind, and social IQ to assess agents’
capabilities in areas including cooperation, com-
munication, empathy, and mimicking human social
behavior. By subjecting agents to complex inter-
active settings, social evaluation provides valuable
insights into agents’ higher-level social cognition.
(3) Multi-task evaluation: In this method, people
use a set of diverse tasks from different domains to
evaluate the agent, which can effectively measure
the agent generalization capability in open-domain
environments [12,29,86,151,162–164,169,170]. (4)
Software testing: In this method, researchers evalu-
ate the agents by letting them conduct tasks such as
software testing tasks, such as generating test cases,
reproducing bugs, debugging code, and interacting
with developers and external tools [159, 160, 167].
Then, one can use metrics like test coverage and
bug detection rate to measure the e ffectiveness of
LLM-based agents.

---PAGE BREAK---

[Page 30]
30 Front. Comput. Sci., 2025, 0(0): 1–42
Benchmarks: Given the metrics and protocols,
a crucial aspect of evaluation is the selection of
appropriate benchmarks. Over time, various bench-
marks have been introduced to assess the capa-
bilities of LLM-based agents across diverse do-
mains and scenarios. Many studies employ envi-
ronments such as ALFWorld [60], IGLU [161],
and Minecraft [16, 33, 38] to evaluate agent ca-
pabilities in interactive and task-oriented simula-
tions. Tachikuma [168] evaluates LLMs’ ability to
infer and understand complex interactions involv-
ing multiple characters and novel objects through
TRPG game logs. AgentBench [169] provides a
comprehensive framework for evaluating LLMs as
autonomous agents across diverse environments. It
represents the first systematic assessment of LLMs
as agents on real-world challenges across diverse
domains. SocKET [163] is a comprehensive bench-
mark for evaluating the social capabilities of LLMs
across 58 tasks covering five categories of social
information such as humor and sarcasm, emotions
and feelings, credibility, etc. AgentSims [34] is
a versatile framework for evaluating LLM-based
agents, where one can flexibly design the agent plan-
ning, memory and action strategies, and measure
the effectiveness of different agent modules in inter-
active environments. ToolBench [151] focuses on
assessing and enhancing language models’ ability
to use tools, featuring 16,464 real-world RESTful
APIs and diverse instructions tailored for single-
and multi-tool scenarios. WebShop [86] develops
a benchmark for evaluating LLM-based agents in
terms of their capabilities for product search and
retrieval, which is constructed using a collection of
1.18 million real-world items. Mobile-Env [164]
serves as an extendable interactive platform de-
signed to evaluate the multi-step interaction capabil-
ities of LLM-based agents. WebArena [173] offers a
comprehensive website environment that spans mul-
tiple domains. Its purpose is to evaluate agents in an
end-to-end fashion and determine the accuracy of
their completed tasks. GentBench [171] is crafted
to evaluate the agent capabilities, including their
reasoning, safety, and e fficiency, when utilizing
tools to complete complex tasks. RocoBench [92]
comprises six tasks that evaluate multi-agent col-
laboration across diverse scenarios, emphasizing
communication and coordination strategies to as-
sess adaptability and generalization in cooperative
robotics. EmotionBench [172] evaluates the emo-
tion appraisal ability of LLMs, i.e., how their feel-
ings change when presented with specific situations.
It collects over 400 situations that elicit eight nega-
tive emotions and measures the emotional states of
LLMs and human subjects using self-report scales.
PEB [125] is tailored for assessing LLM-based
agents in penetration testing scenarios, comprising
13 diverse targets from leading platforms. It of-
fers a structured evaluation across varying difficulty
levels, reflecting real-world challenges for agents.
ClemBench [165] contains five Dialogue Games to
assess LLMs’ ability as a player. E2E [174] serves
as an end-to-end benchmark for testing the accuracy
and usefulness of chatbots.
Remark. Objective evaluation facilitates the quanti-
tative analysis of capabilities in LLM-based agents
through a variety of metrics. While current tech-
niques can not perfectly measure all types of agent
capabilities, objective evaluation provides essen-
tial insights that complement subjective assessment.
Continued advancements in benchmarks and method-
ologies for objective evaluation will enhance the
development and understanding of LLM-based au-
tonomous agents further.
In the above sections, we introduce both sub-
jective and objective strategies for LLM-based au-

---PAGE BREAK---

[Page 31]
Lei Wang et al. A Survey on Large Language Model based Autonomous Agents 31
tonomous agent evaluation. The evaluation of the
agents play significant roles in this domain. How-
ever, both subjective and objective evaluation have
their own strengths and weakness. Maybe, in prac-
tice, they should be combined to comprehensively
evaluate the agents. We summarize the correspon-
dence between the previous work and these evalua-
tion strategies in Table 3.
5 Related Surveys
With the vigorous development of large language
models, a variety of comprehensive surveys have
emerged, providing detailed insights into various
aspects. [175] extensively introduces the back-
ground, main findings, and mainstream technolo-
gies of LLMs, encompassing a vast array of existing
works. On the other hand, [176] primarily focus
on the applications of LLMs in various downstream
tasks and the challenges associated with their de-
ployment. Aligning LLMs with human intelligence
is an active area of research to address concerns
such as biases and illusions. [177] have compiled
existing techniques for human alignment, including
data collection and model training methodologies.
Reasoning is a crucial aspect of intelligence, in-
fluencing decision-making, problem-solving, and
other cognitive abilities. [178] presents the cur-
rent state of research on LLMs’ reasoning abili-
ties, exploring approaches to improve and evaluate
their reasoning skills. [179] propose that language
models can be enhanced with reasoning capabilities
and the ability to utilize tools, termed Augmented
Language Models (ALMs). They conduct a com-
prehensive review of the latest advancements in
ALMs. As the utilization of large-scale models be-
comes more prevalent, evaluating their performance
is increasingly critical. [180] shed light on eval-
uating LLMs, addressing what to evaluate, where
to evaluate, and how to assess their performance
in downstream tasks and societal impact. [181]
also discusses the capabilities and limitations of
LLMs in various downstream tasks. The afore-
mentioned research encompasses various aspects
of large models, including training, application, and
evaluation. However, prior to this paper, no work
has specifically focused on the rapidly emerging
and highly promising field of LLM-based Agents.
In this study, we have compiled 100 relevant works
on LLM-based Agents, covering their construction,
applications, and evaluation processes.
6 Challenges
While previous work on LLM-based autonomous
agent has obtained many remarkable successes, this
field is still at its initial stage, and there are several
significant challenges that need to be addressed in
its development. In the following, we present many
representative challenges.
6.1 Role-playing Capability
Different from traditional LLMs, autonomous agent
usually has to play as specific roles (e.g., program
coder, researcher and chemist) for accomplishing
different tasks. Thus, the capability of the agent
for role-playing is very important. Although LLMs
can effectively simulate many common roles such
as movie reviewers, there are still various roles and
aspects that they struggle to capture accurately. To
begin with, LLMs are usually trained based on web-
corpus, thus for the roles which are seldom dis-
cussed on the web or the newly emerging roles,
LLMs may not simulate them well. In addition, pre-
vious research [30] has shown that existing LLMs
may not well model the human cognitive psychol-
ogy characters, leading to the lack of self-awareness

---PAGE BREAK---

[Page 32]
32 Front. Comput. Sci., 2025, 0(0): 1–42
in conversation scenarios. Potential solution to these
problems may include fine-tuning LLMs or care-
fully designing the agent prompts/architectures [182].
For example, one can firstly collect real-human data
for uncommon roles or psychology characters, and
then leverage it to fine-tune LLMs. However, how
to ensure that fine-tuned model still perform well
for the common roles may pose further challenges.
Beyond fine-tuning, one can also design tailored
agent prompts/architectures to enhance the capa-
bility of LLM on role-playing. However, finding
the optimal prompts/architectures is not easy, since
their designing spaces are too large.
6.2 Generalized Human Alignment
Human alignment has been discussed a lot for tradi-
tional LLMs. In the field of LLM-based autonomous
agent, especially when the agents are leveraged
for simulation, we believe this concept should be
discussed more in depth. In order to better serve
human-beings, traditional LLMs are usually fine-
tuned to be aligned with correct human values, for
example, the agent should not plan to make a bomb
for avenging society. However, when the agents are
leveraged for real-world simulation, an ideal simula-
tor should be able to honestly depict diverse human
traits, including the ones with incorrect values. Ac-
tually, simulating the human negative aspects can
be even more important, since an important goal of
simulation is to discover and solve problems, and
without negative aspects means no problem to be
solved. For example, to simulate the real-world
society, we may have to allow the agent to plan
for making a bomb, and observe how it will act to
implement the plan as well as the influence of its
behaviors. Based on these observations, people can
make better actions to stop similar behaviors in real-
world society. Inspired by the above case, maybe
an important problem for agent-based simulation
is how to conduct generalized human alignment,
that is, for different purposes and applications, the
agent should be able to align with diverse human
values. However, existing powerful LLMs includ-
ing ChatGPT and GPT-4 are mostly aligned with
unified human values. Thus, an interesting direc-
tion is how to “realign” these models by designing
proper prompting strategies.
6.3 Prompt Robustness
To ensure rational behavior in agents, it’s a com-
mon practice for designers to embed supplemen-
tary modules, such as memory and planning mod-
ules, into LLMs. However, the inclusion of these
modules necessitates the development of more com-
plex prompts in order to facilitate consistent op-
eration and effective communication. Previous re-
search [183, 184] has highlighted the lack of robust-
ness in prompts for LLMs, as even minor alterations
can yield substantially different outcomes. This is-
sue becomes more pronounced when constructing
autonomous agents, as they encompass not a sin-
gle prompt but a prompt framework that considers
all modules, wherein the prompt for one module
has the potential to influence others. Moreover, the
prompt frameworks can vary significantly across dif-
ferent LLMs. The development of a unified and re-
silient prompt framework applicable across diverse
LLMs remains a critical and unresolved challenge.
There are two potential solutions to the aforemen-
tioned problems: (1) manually crafting the essential
prompt elements through trial and error, or (2) auto-
matically generating prompts using GPT.
6.4 Hallucination
Hallucination poses a fundamental challenge for
LLMs, characterized by the models’ tendency to

---PAGE BREAK---

[Page 33]
Lei Wang et al. A Survey on Large Language Model based Autonomous Agents 33
produce false information with a high level of confi-
dence. This challenge is not limited to LLMs alone
but is also a significant concern in the domain of
autonomous agents. For instance, in [185], it was
observed that when confronted with simplistic in-
structions during code generation tasks, the agent
may exhibit hallucinatory behavior. Hallucination
can lead to serious consequences such as incorrect
or misleading code, security risks, and ethical is-
sues [185]. To mitigate this issue, incorporating
human correction feedback directly into the itera-
tive process of human-agent interaction presents
a viable approach [23]. More discussions on the
hallucination problem can be seen in [175].
6.5 Knowledge Boundary
A pivotal application of LLM-based autonomous
agents lies in simulating diverse real-world human
behaviors [20]. The study of human simulation has
a long history, and the recent surge in interest can
be attributed to the remarkable advancements made
by LLMs, which have demonstrated significant ca-
pabilities in simulating human behavior. However,
it is important to recognize that the power of LLMs
may not always be advantageous. Specifically, an
ideal simulation should accurately replicate human
knowledge. In this context, LLMs may display
overwhelming capabilities, being trained on a vast
corpus of web knowledge that far exceeds what
an average individual might know. The immense
capabilities of LLMs can significantly impact the
effectiveness of simulations. For instance, when
attempting to simulate user selection behaviors for
various movies, it is crucial to ensure that LLMs
assume a position of having no prior knowledge
of these movies. However, there is a possibility
that LLMs have already acquired information about
these movies. Without implementing appropriate
strategies, LLMs may make decisions based on
their extensive knowledge, even though real-world
users would not have access to the contents of these
movies beforehand. Based on the above example,
we may conclude that for building believable agent
simulation environment, an important problem is
how to constrain the utilization of user-unknown
knowledge of LLM.
6.6 E fficiency
Due to their autoregressive architecture, LLMs typ-
ically have slow inference speeds. However, the
agent may need to query LLMs for each action
multiple times, such as extracting information from
memory, make plans before taking actions and so
on. Consequently, the efficiency of agent actions is
greatly affected by the speed of LLM inference.
7 Conclusion
In this survey, we systematically summarize exist-
ing research in the field of LLM-based autonomous
agents. We present and review these studies from
three aspects including the construction, application,
and evaluation of the agents. For each of these as-
pects, we provide a detailed taxonomy to draw con-
nections among the existing research, summarizing
the major techniques and their development histo-
ries. In addition to reviewing the previous work, we
also propose several challenges in this field, which
are expected to guide potential future directions.
Acknowledgement
This work is supported in part by National Natu-
ral Science Foundation of China (No. 62102420),
Beijing Outstanding Young Scientist Program NO.
BJJWZYJH012019100020098, Intelligent Social

---PAGE BREAK---

[Page 34]
34 Front. Comput. Sci., 2025, 0(0): 1–42
Governance Platform, Major Innovation & Plan-
ning Interdisciplinary Platform for the "Double-
First Class" Initiative, Renmin University of China,
Public Computing Cloud, Renmin University of
China, fund for building world-class universities
(disciplines) of Renmin University of China, Intelli-
gent Social Governance Platform.
References
1. Mnih V , Kavukcuoglu K, Silver D, Rusu A A, Veness
J, Bellemare M G, Graves A, Riedmiller M, Fidjeland
A K, Ostrovski G, others . Human-level control through
deep reinforcement learning. nature, 2015, 518(7540):
529–533
2. Lillicrap T P, Hunt J J, Pritzel A, Heess N, Erez
T, Tassa Y , Silver D, Wierstra D. Continuous con-
trol with deep reinforcement learning. arXiv preprint
arXiv:1509.02971, 2015
3. Schulman J, Wolski F, Dhariwal P, Radford A, Klimov
O. Proximal policy optimization algorithms. arXiv
preprint arXiv:1707.06347, 2017
4. Haarnoja T, Zhou A, Abbeel P, Levine S. Soft actor-
critic: O ff-policy maximum entropy deep reinforce-
ment learning with a stochastic actor. In: International
conference on machine learning. 2018, 1861–1870
5. Brown T, Mann B, Ryder N, Subbiah M, Kaplan J D,
Dhariwal P, Neelakantan A, Shyam P, Sastry G, Askell
A, others . Language models are few-shot learners.
Advances in neural information processing systems,
2020, 33: 1877–1901
6. Radford A, Wu J, Child R, Luan D, Amodei D,
Sutskever I, others . Language models are unsuper-
vised multitask learners. OpenAI blog, 2019, 1(8):
9
7. Achiam J, Adler S, Agarwal S, Ahmad L, Akkaya I,
Aleman F L, Almeida D, Altenschmidt J, Altman S,
Anadkat S, others . Gpt-4 technical report. arXiv
preprint arXiv:2303.08774, 2023
8. Anthropic . Model card and evaluations for
claude models. https://www-files.
anthropic.com/production/images/
Model-Card-Claude-2.pdf?ref=
maginative.com, 2023
9. Touvron H, Lavril T, Izacard G, Martinet X, Lachaux
M A, Lacroix T, Rozière B, Goyal N, Hambro E, Azhar
F, others . Llama: Open and e fficient foundation lan-
guage models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2302.13971, 2023
10. Touvron H, Martin L, Stone K, Albert P, Almahairi A,
Babaei Y , Bashlykov N, Batra S, Bhargava P, Bhosale
S, others . Llama 2: Open foundation and fine-tuned
chat models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2307.09288, 2023
11. Chen X, Li S, Li H, Jiang S, Qi Y , Song L. Genera-
tive adversarial user model for reinforcement learning
based recommendation system. In: International Con-
ference on Machine Learning. 2019, 1052–1061
12. Shinn N, Cassano F, Gopinath A, Narasimhan K, Yao S.
Reflexion: Language agents with verbal reinforcement
learning. Advances in Neural Information Processing
Systems, 2024, 36
13. Shen Y , Song K, Tan X, Li D, Lu W, Zhuang Y . Hug-
ginggpt: Solving ai tasks with chatgpt and its friends
in hugging face. Advances in Neural Information Pro-
cessing Systems, 2024, 36
14. Qin Y , Liang S, Ye Y , Zhu K, Yan L, Lu Y , Lin Y ,
Cong X, Tang X, Qian B, others . Toolllm: Facilitating
large language models to master 16000 + real-world
apis. arXiv preprint arXiv:2307.16789, 2023
15. Schick T, Dwivedi-Yu J, Dessì R, Raileanu R, Lomeli
M, Hambro E, Zettlemoyer L, Cancedda N, Scialom T.
Toolformer: Language models can teach themselves to
use tools. Advances in Neural Information Processing
Systems, 2024, 36
16. Zhu X, Chen Y , Tian H, Tao C, Su W, Yang C, Huang
G, Li B, Lu L, Wang X, others . Ghost in the minecraft:
Generally capable agents for open-world enviroments
via large language models with text-based knowledge
and memory. arXiv preprint arXiv:2305.17144, 2023
17. Sclar M, Kumar S, West P, Suhr A, Choi Y , Tsvetkov
Y . Minding language models’(lack of) theory of mind:
A plug-and-play multi-character belief tracker. arXiv
preprint arXiv:2306.00924, 2023
18. Qian C, Cong X, Yang C, Chen W, Su Y , Xu J, Liu Z,
Sun M. Communicative agents for software develop-
ment. arXiv preprint arXiv:2307.07924, 2023
19. al. e C. Agentverse. https://github.com/
OpenBMB/AgentVerse, 2023
20. Park J S, O’Brien J, Cai C J, Morris M R, Liang P,
Bernstein M S. Generative agents: Interactive simu-
lacra of human behavior. In: Proceedings of the 36th
Annual ACM Symposium on User Interface Software
and Technology. 2023, 1–22
21. Wang L, Zhang J, Chen X, Lin Y , Song R, Zhao
W X, Wen J R. Recagent: A novel simulation
paradigm for recommender systems. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2306.02552, 2023
22. Zhang H, Du W, Shan J, Zhou Q, Du Y , Tenenbaum
J B, Shu T, Gan C. Building cooperative embodied
agents modularly with large language models. arXiv

---PAGE BREAK---

[Page 35]
Lei Wang et al. A Survey on Large Language Model based Autonomous Agents 35
preprint arXiv:2307.02485, 2023
23. Hong S, Zheng X, Chen J, Cheng Y , Wang J, Zhang C,
Wang Z, Yau S K S, Lin Z, Zhou L, others . Metagpt:
Meta programming for multi-agent collaborative frame-
work. arXiv preprint arXiv:2308.00352, 2023
24. Dong Y , Jiang X, Jin Z, Li G. Self-collaboration
code generation via chatgpt. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2304.07590, 2023
25. Safdari M, Serapio-García G, Crepy C, Fitz S, Romero
P, Sun L, Abdulhai M, Faust A, Matari ´c M. Person-
ality traits in large language models. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2307.00184, 2023
26. Johnson J A. Measuring thirty facets of the five factor
model with a 120-item public domain inventory: De-
velopment of the ipip-neo-120. Journal of research in
personality, 2014, 51: 78–89
27. John O P, Donahue E M, Kentle R L. Big five inventory.
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 1991
28. Deshpande A, Murahari V , Rajpurohit T, Kalyan
A, Narasimhan K. Toxicity in chatgpt: Analyzing
persona-assigned language models. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2304.05335, 2023
29. Argyle L P, Busby E C, Fulda N, Gubler J R, Rytting C,
Wingate D. Out of one, many: Using language models
to simulate human samples. Political Analysis, 2023,
31(3): 337–351
30. Fischer K A. Reflective linguistic programming (rlp):
A stepping stone in socially-aware agi (socialagi).
arXiv preprint arXiv:2305.12647, 2023
31. Rana K, Haviland J, Garg S, Abou-Chakra J, Reid I,
Suenderhauf N. Sayplan: Grounding large language
models using 3d scene graphs for scalable robot task
planning. In: 7th Annual Conference on Robot Learn-
ing. 2023
32. Zhu A, Martin L, Head A, Callison-Burch C. Calypso:
Llms as dungeon master’s assistants. In: Proceedings
of the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence and
Interactive Digital Entertainment. 2023, 380–390
33. Wang Z, Cai S, Chen G, Liu A, Ma X, Liang Y . De-
scribe, explain, plan and select: Interactive planning
with large language models enables open-world multi-
task agents. arXiv preprint arXiv:2302.01560, 2023
34. Lin J, Zhao H, Zhang A, Wu Y , Ping H, Chen Q.
Agentsims: An open-source sandbox for large language
model evaluation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2308.04026,
2023
35. Liang X, Wang B, Huang H, Wu S, Wu P, Lu L, Ma Z,
Li Z. Unleashing infinite-length input capacity for
large-scale language models with self-controlled mem-
ory system. arXiv preprint arXiv:2304.13343, 2023
36. Ng Y , Miyashita D, Hoshi Y , Morioka Y , Torii O, Ko-
dama T, Deguchi J. Simplyretrieve: A private and
lightweight retrieval-centric generative ai tool. arXiv
preprint arXiv:2308.03983, 2023
37. Huang Z, Gutierrez S, Kamana H, MacNeil S. Memory
sandbox: Transparent and interactive memory manage-
ment for conversational agents. In: Adjunct Proceed-
ings of the 36th Annual ACM Symposium on User
Interface Software and Technology. 2023, 1–3
38. Wang G, Xie Y , Jiang Y , Mandlekar A, Xiao C, Zhu
Y , Fan L, Anandkumar A. V oyager: An open-ended
embodied agent with large language models. arXiv
preprint arXiv:2305.16291, 2023
39. Zhong W, Guo L, Gao Q, Wang Y . Memorybank: En-
hancing large language models with long-term memory.
arXiv preprint arXiv:2305.10250, 2023
40. Hu C, Fu J, Du C, Luo S, Zhao J, Zhao H. Chatdb: Aug-
menting llms with databases as their symbolic memory.
arXiv preprint arXiv:2306.03901, 2023
41. Modarressi A, Imani A, Fayyaz M, Schütze H. Ret-
llm: Towards a general read-write memory for large
language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2305.14322,
2023
42. Schuurmans D. Memory augmented large language
models are computationally universal. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2301.04589, 2023
43. Zhao A, Huang D, Xu Q, Lin M, Liu Y J, Huang G.
Expel: Llm agents are experiential learners. arXiv
preprint arXiv:2308.10144, 2023
44. Huang W, Abbeel P, Pathak D, Mordatch I. Language
models as zero-shot planners: Extracting actionable
knowledge for embodied agents. In: International Con-
ference on Machine Learning. 2022, 9118–9147
45. Wei J, Wang X, Schuurmans D, Bosma M, Xia F, Chi E,
Le Q V , Zhou D, others . Chain-of-thought prompting
elicits reasoning in large language models. Advances
in Neural Information Processing Systems, 2022, 35:
24824–24837
46. Kojima T, Gu S S, Reid M, Matsuo Y , Iwasawa Y . Large
language models are zero-shot reasoners. Advances
in neural information processing systems, 2022, 35:
22199–22213
47. Raman S S, Cohen V , Rosen E, Idrees I, Paulius D,
Tellex S. Planning with large language models via
corrective re-prompting. In: NeurIPS 2022 Foundation
Models for Decision Making Workshop. 2022
48. Xu B, Peng Z, Lei B, Mukherjee S, Liu Y , Xu D. Re-
woo: Decoupling reasoning from observations for ef-
ficient augmented language models. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2305.18323, 2023
49. Lin B Y , Fu Y , Yang K, Brahman F, Huang S, Bhaga-
vatula C, Ammanabrolu P, Choi Y , Ren X. Swiftsage:

---PAGE BREAK---

[Page 36]
36 Front. Comput. Sci., 2025, 0(0): 1–42
A generative agent with fast and slow thinking for com-
plex interactive tasks. Advances in Neural Information
Processing Systems, 2024, 36
50. Evans J S B, Stanovich K E. Dual-process theories of
higher cognition: Advancing the debate. Perspectives
on psychological science, 2013, 8(3): 223–241
51. Wang X, Wei J, Schuurmans D, Le Q, Chi E, Narang
S, Chowdhery A, Zhou D. Self-consistency improves
chain of thought reasoning in language models. arXiv
preprint arXiv:2203.11171, 2022
52. Yao S, Yu D, Zhao J, Shafran I, Gri ffiths T, Cao Y ,
Narasimhan K. Tree of thoughts: Deliberate problem
solving with large language models. Advances in Neu-
ral Information Processing Systems, 2024, 36
53. Wang Y , Jiang Z, Chen Z, Yang F, Zhou Y , Cho E,
Fan X, Huang X, Lu Y , Yang Y . Recmind: Large
language model powered agent for recommendation.
arXiv preprint arXiv:2308.14296, 2023
54. Besta M, Blach N, Kubicek A, Gerstenberger R,
Gianinazzi L, Gajda J, Lehmann T, Podstawski M,
Niewiadomski H, Nyczyk P, others . Graph of thoughts:
Solving elaborate problems with large language mod-
els. arXiv preprint arXiv:2308.09687, 2023
55. Sel B, Al-Tawaha A, Khattar V , Wang L, Jia R, Jin
M. Algorithm of thoughts: Enhancing exploration
of ideas in large language models. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2308.10379, 2023
56. Gramopadhye M, Szafir D. Generating executable ac-
tion plans with environmentally-aware language mod-
els. In: 2023 IEEE /RSJ International Conference on
Intelligent Robots and Systems (IROS). 2023, 3568–
3575
57. Hao S, Gu Y , Ma H, Hong J J, Wang Z, Wang D Z,
Hu Z. Reasoning with language model is planning with
world model. arXiv preprint arXiv:2305.14992, 2023
58. Liu B, Jiang Y , Zhang X, Liu Q, Zhang S, Biswas J,
Stone P. LLM +P: Empowering large language mod-
els with optimal planning proficiency. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2304.11477, 2023
59. Dagan G, Keller F, Lascarides A. Dynamic planning
with a llm. arXiv preprint arXiv:2308.06391, 2023
60. Yao S, Zhao J, Yu D, Du N, Shafran I, Narasimhan
K, Cao Y . React: Synergizing reasoning and acting
in language models. In: The Twelfth International
Conference on Learning Representations. 2023
61. Song C H, Wu J, Washington C, Sadler B M, Chao W L,
Su Y . Llm-planner: Few-shot grounded planning for
embodied agents with large language models. In: Pro-
ceedings of the IEEE /CVF International Conference
on Computer Vision. 2023, 2998–3009
62. Huang W, Xia F, Xiao T, Chan H, Liang J, Flo-
rence P, Zeng A, Tompson J, Mordatch I, Chebotar
Y , others . Inner monologue: Embodied reasoning
through planning with language models. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2207.05608, 2022
63. Madaan A, Tandon N, Gupta P, Hallinan S, Gao L,
Wiegreffe S, Alon U, Dziri N, Prabhumoye S, Yang
Y , others . Self-refine: Iterative refinement with self-
feedback. Advances in Neural Information Processing
Systems, 2024, 36
64. Miao N, Teh Y W, Rainforth T. Selfcheck: Using llms
to zero-shot check their own step-by-step reasoning.
In: The Twelfth International Conference on Learning
Representations. 2023
65. Chen P L, Chang C S. Interact: Exploring the poten-
tials of chatgpt as a cooperative agent. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2308.01552, 2023
66. Chen Z, Zhou K, Zhang B, Gong Z, Zhao W X, Wen
J R. Chatcot: Tool-augmented chain-of-thought rea-
soning on\\chat-based large language models. arXiv
preprint arXiv:2305.14323, 2023
67. Nakano R, Hilton J, Balaji S, Wu J, Ouyang L, Kim
C, Hesse C, Jain S, Kosaraju V , Saunders W, others
. Webgpt: Browser-assisted question-answering with
human feedback. arXiv preprint arXiv:2112.09332,
2021
68. Ruan J, Chen Y , Zhang B, Xu Z, Bao T, Du G, Shi S,
Mao H, Zeng X, Zhao R. TPTU: Task planning and
tool usage of large language model-based AI agents.
arXiv preprint arXiv:2308.03427, 2023
69. Patil S G, Zhang T, Wang X, Gonzalez J E. Gorilla:
Large language model connected with massive apis.
arXiv preprint arXiv:2305.15334, 2023
70. Li M, Song F, Yu B, Yu H, Li Z, Huang F, Li Y . Api-
bank: A benchmark for tool-augmented llms. arXiv
preprint arXiv:2304.08244, 2023
71. Song Y , Xiong W, Zhu D, Li C, Wang K, Tian Y ,
Li S. Restgpt: Connecting large language models with
real-world applications via restful apis. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2306.06624, 2023
72. Liang Y , Wu C, Song T, Wu W, Xia Y , Liu Y , Ou Y ,
Lu S, Ji L, Mao S, others . Taskmatrix. ai: Completing
tasks by connecting foundation models with millions
of apis. Intelligent Computing, 2024, 3: 0063
73. Karpas E, Abend O, Belinkov Y , Lenz B, Lieber O,
Ratner N, Shoham Y , Bata H, Levine Y , Leyton-Brown
K, others . Mrkl systems: A modular, neuro-symbolic
architecture that combines large language models, ex-
ternal knowledge sources and discrete reasoning. arXiv
preprint arXiv:2205.00445, 2022
74. Ge Y , Hua W, Mei K, Tan J, Xu S, Li Z, Zhang Y , others
. Openagi: When llm meets domain experts. Advances

---PAGE BREAK---

[Page 37]
Lei Wang et al. A Survey on Large Language Model based Autonomous Agents 37
in Neural Information Processing Systems, 2024, 36
75. Surís D, Menon S, V ondrick C. Vipergpt: Visual infer-
ence via python execution for reasoning. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2303.08128, 2023
76. Bran A M, Cox S, White A D, Schwaller P. Chem-
crow: Augmenting large-language models with chem-
istry tools. arXiv preprint arXiv:2304.05376, 2023
77. Yang Z, Li L, Wang J, Lin K, Azarnasab E, Ahmed F,
Liu Z, Liu C, Zeng M, Wang L. Mm-react: Prompting
chatgpt for multimodal reasoning and action. arXiv
preprint arXiv:2303.11381, 2023
78. Gao C, Lan X, Lu Z, Mao J, Piao J, Wang H, Jin D,
Li Y . S3: Social-network simulation system with large
language model-empowered agents. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2307.14984, 2023
79. Ahn M, Brohan A, Brown N, Chebotar Y , Cortes O,
David B, Finn C, Fu C, Gopalakrishnan K, Hausman K,
others . Do as i can, not as i say: Grounding language in
robotic affordances. arXiv preprint arXiv:2204.01691,
2022
80. Park J S, Popowski L, Cai C, Morris M R, Liang P,
Bernstein M S. Social simulacra: Creating populated
prototypes for social computing systems. In: Proceed-
ings of the 35th Annual ACM Symposium on User
Interface Software and Technology. 2022, 1–18
81. Li G, Hammoud H A A K, Itani H, Khizbullin D,
Ghanem B. Camel: Communicative agents for" mind"
exploration of large scale language model society.
arXiv preprint arXiv:2303.17760, 2023
82. al. e T. Auto-GPT. https://github.com/
Significant-Gravitas/Auto-GPT, 2023
83. Liu R, Yang R, Jia C, Zhang G, Zhou D, Dai A M, Yang
D, V osoughi S. Training socially aligned language
models in simulated human society. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2305.16960, 2023
84. Chen L, Wang L, Dong H, Du Y , Yan J, Yang F, Li S,
Zhao P, Qin S, Rajmohan S, others . Introspective tips:
Large language model for in-context decision making.
arXiv preprint arXiv:2305.11598, 2023
85. Liu H, Sferrazza C, Abbeel P. Chain of hindsight
aligns language models with feedback. In: The Twelfth
International Conference on Learning Representations.
2023
86. Yao S, Chen H, Yang J, Narasimhan K. Webshop:
Towards scalable real-world web interaction with
grounded language agents. Advances in Neural Infor-
mation Processing Systems, 2022, 35: 20744–20757
87. Dan Y , Lei Z, Gu Y , Li Y , Yin J, Lin J, Ye L, Tie Z, Zhou
Y , Wang Y , others . Educhat: A large-scale language
model-based chatbot system for intelligent education.
arXiv preprint arXiv:2308.02773, 2023
88. Deng X, Gu Y , Zheng B, Chen S, Stevens S, Wang
B, Sun H, Su Y . Mind2web: Towards a generalist
agent for the web. Advances in Neural Information
Processing Systems, 2024, 36
89. Sun R, Arik S O, Nakhost H, Dai H, Sinha R,
Yin P, Pfister T. Sql-palm: Improved large lan-
guage modeladaptation for text-to-sql. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2306.00739, 2023
90. Yao W, Heinecke S, Niebles J C, Liu Z, Feng Y , Xue
L, Murthy R, Chen Z, Zhang J, Arpit D, Xu R, Mui
P, Wang H, Xiong C, Savarese S. Retroformer: Ret-
rospective large language agents with policy gradient
optimization, 2023
91. Shu Y , Gu H, Zhang P, Zhang H, Lu T, Li D, Gu N.
Rah! recsys-assistant-human: A human-central rec-
ommendation framework with large language models.
arXiv preprint arXiv:2308.09904, 2023
92. Mandi Z, Jain S, Song S. Roco: Dialectic multi-
robot collaboration with large language models. arXiv
preprint arXiv:2307.04738, 2023
93. Zhang C, Liu L, Wang J, Wang C, Sun X, Wang H, Cai
M. Prefer: Prompt ensemble learning via feedback-
reflect-refine. arXiv preprint arXiv:2308.12033, 2023
94. Du Y , Li S, Torralba A, Tenenbaum J B, Mordatch
I. Improving factuality and reasoning in language
models through multiagent debate. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2305.14325, 2023
95. Yang Z, Liu J, Han Y , Chen X, Huang Z, Fu B, Yu G.
Appagent: Multimodal agents as smartphone users.
arXiv preprint arXiv:2312.13771, 2023
96. Madaan A, Tandon N, Clark P, Yang Y . Memory-
assisted prompt editing to improve GPT-3 after de-
ployment. In: Proceedings of the 2023 Conference on
Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing.
2022
97. Colas C, Teodorescu L, Oudeyer P Y , Yuan X, Côté
M A. Augmenting autotelic agents with large language
models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2305.12487, 2023
98. Nascimento N, Alencar P, Cowan D. Self-adaptive
large language model (llm)-based multiagent systems.
In: 2023 IEEE International Conference on Autonomic
Computing and Self-Organizing Systems Companion
(ACSOS-C). 2023, 104–109
99. Saha S, Hase P, Bansal M. Can language models teach
weaker agents? teacher explanations improve students
via theory of mind. arXiv preprint arXiv:2306.09299,
2023
100. Zhuge M, Liu H, Faccio F, Ashley D R, Csordás R,
Gopalakrishnan A, Hamdi A, Hammoud H A A K,
Herrmann V , Irie K, others . Mindstorms in natu-
ral language-based societies of mind. arXiv preprint

---PAGE BREAK---

[Page 38]
38 Front. Comput. Sci., 2025, 0(0): 1–42
arXiv:2305.17066, 2023
101. Aher G V , Arriaga R I, Kalai A T. Using large language
models to simulate multiple humans and replicate hu-
man subject studies. In: International Conference on
Machine Learning. 2023, 337–371
102. Akata E, Schulz L, Coda-Forno J, Oh S J, Bethge M,
Schulz E. Playing repeated games with large language
models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2305.16867, 2023
103. Ma Z, Mei Y , Su Z. Understanding the benefits and
challenges of using large language model-based con-
versational agents for mental well-being support. In:
AMIA Annual Symposium Proceedings. 2023, 1105
104. Ziems C, Held W, Shaikh O, Chen J, Zhang Z, Yang D.
Can large language models transform computational
social science? arXiv preprint arXiv:2305.03514, 2023
105. Horton J J. Large language models as simulated eco-
nomic agents: What can we learn from homo silicus?
Technical report, National Bureau of Economic Re-
search, 2023
106. Li S, Yang J, Zhao K. Are you in a masquerade? explor-
ing the behavior and impact of large language model
driven social bots in online social networks. arXiv
preprint arXiv:2307.10337, 2023
107. Li C, Su X, Fan C, Han H, Xue C, Zheng C. Quantify-
ing the impact of large language models on collective
opinion dynamics. arXiv preprint arXiv:2308.03313,
2023
108. Kovaˇc G, Portelas R, Dominey P F, Oudeyer P Y . The
socialai school: Insights from developmental psychol-
ogy towards artificial socio-cultural agents. arXiv
preprint arXiv:2307.07871, 2023
109. Williams R, Hosseinichimeh N, Majumdar A, Ghaf-
farzadegan N. Epidemic modeling with generative
agents. arXiv preprint arXiv:2307.04986, 2023
110. Jinxin S, Jiabao Z, Yilei W, Xingjiao W, Jiawen L,
Liang H. Cgmi: Configurable general multi-agent in-
teraction framework. arXiv preprint arXiv:2308.12503,
2023
111. Cui J, Li Z, Yan Y , Chen B, Yuan L. Chatlaw: Open-
source legal large language model with integrated exter-
nal knowledge bases. arXiv preprint arXiv:2306.16092,
2023
112. Hamilton S. Blind judgement: Agent-based
supreme court modelling with gpt. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2301.05327, 2023
113. Bail C A. Can generative ai improve social science?
2023
114. Boiko D A, MacKnight R, Gomes G. Emergent au-
tonomous scientific research capabilities of large lan-
guage models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2304.05332, 2023
115. Kang Y , Kim J. Chatmof: An autonomous ai system for
predicting and generating metal-organic frameworks.
arXiv preprint arXiv:2308.01423, 2023
116. Swan M, Kido T, Roland E, Santos R P d. Math agents:
Computational infrastructure, mathematical embed-
ding, and genomics. arXiv preprint arXiv:2307.02502,
2023
117. Drori I, Zhang S, Shuttleworth R, Tang L, Lu A, Ke E,
Liu K, Chen L, Tran S, Cheng N, others . A neural
network solves, explains, and generates university math
problems by program synthesis and few-shot learning
at human level. Proceedings of the National Academy
of Sciences, 2022, 119(32): e2123433119
118. Chen M, Tworek J, Jun H, Yuan Q, Pinto H P d O,
Kaplan J, Edwards H, Burda Y , Joseph N, Brockman
G, others . Evaluating large language models trained
on code. arXiv preprint arXiv:2107.03374, 2021
119. Liffiton M, Sheese B E, Savelka J, Denny P. Codehelp:
Using large language models with guardrails for scal-
able support in programming classes. In: Proceedings
of the 23rd Koli Calling International Conference on
Computing Education Research. 2023, 1–11
120. Matelsky J K, Parodi F, Liu T, Lange R D, Kording
K P. A large language model-assisted education tool
to provide feedback on open-ended responses. arXiv
preprint arXiv:2308.02439, 2023
121. Grossmann I, Feinberg M, Parker D C, Christakis N A,
Tetlock P E, Cunningham W A. Ai and the trans-
formation of social science research. Science, 2023,
380(6650): 1108–1109
122. Zhou X, Li G, Liu Z. Llm as dba. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2308.05481, 2023
123. He Z, Wu H, Zhang X, Yao X, Zheng S, Zheng H, Yu B.
Chateda: A large language model powered autonomous
agent for eda. In: 2023 ACM/IEEE 5th Workshop on
Machine Learning for CAD (MLCAD). 2023, 1–6
124. Huang X, Lian J, Lei Y , Yao J, Lian D, Xie X. Rec-
ommender ai agent: Integrating large language mod-
els for interactive recommendations. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2308.16505, 2023
125. Deng G, Liu Y , Mayoral-Vilches V , Liu P, Li Y , Xu Y ,
Zhang T, Liu Y , Pinzger M, Rass S. Pentestgpt: An llm-
empowered automatic penetration testing tool. arXiv
preprint arXiv:2308.06782, 2023
126. al. e S. Smolmodels. https://github.com/
smol-ai/developer, 2023
127. al. e M U. DemoGPT. https://github.com/
melih-unsal/DemoGPT, 2023
128. al. e A O. GPT engineer. https://github.com/
AntonOsika/gpt-engineer, 2023
129. Xia Y , Shenoy M, Jazdi N, Weyrich M. Towards au-
tonomous system: flexible modular production system

---PAGE BREAK---

[Page 39]
Lei Wang et al. A Survey on Large Language Model based Autonomous Agents 39
enhanced with large language model agents. arXiv
preprint arXiv:2304.14721, 2023
130. Ogundare O, Madasu S, Wiggins N. Industrial engi-
neering with large language models: A case study of
chatgpt’s performance on oil & gas problems. arXiv
preprint arXiv:2304.14354, 2023
131. Zhang C, Yang K, Hu S, Wang Z, Li G, Sun Y , Zhang C,
Zhang Z, Liu A, Zhu S C, others . Proagent: Building
proactive cooperative ai with large language models.
arXiv preprint arXiv:2308.11339, 2023
132. Hu B, Zhao C, others . Enabling intelligent interactions
between an agent and an llm: A reinforcement learning
approach. arXiv:2306.03604, 2023
133. Wu Y , Min S Y , Bisk Y , Salakhutdinov R, Azaria A,
Li Y , Mitchell T, Prabhumoye S. Plan, eliminate, and
track–language models are good teachers for embodied
agents. arXiv preprint arXiv:2305.02412, 2023
134. Zhang D, Chen L, Zhang S, Xu H, Zhao Z, Yu K.
Large language models are semi-parametric reinforce-
ment learning agents. Advances in Neural Information
Processing Systems, 2024, 36
135. Di Palo N, Byravan A, Hasenclever L, Wulfmeier M,
Heess N, Riedmiller M. Towards a unified agent with
foundation models. In: Workshop on Reincarnating
Reinforcement Learning at ICLR 2023. 2023
136. Wu J, Antonova R, Kan A, Lepert M, Zeng A, Song S,
Bohg J, Rusinkiewicz S, Funkhouser T. Tidybot: Per-
sonalized robot assistance with large language models.
arXiv preprint arXiv:2305.05658, 2023
137. Wu Z, Wang Z, Xu X, Lu J, Yan H. Embodied task
planning with large language models. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2307.01848, 2023
138. Dasgupta I, Kaeser-Chen C, Marino K, Ahuja A,
Babayan S, Hill F, Fergus R. Collaborating with lan-
guage models for embodied reasoning. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2302.00763, 2023
139. Nottingham K, Ammanabrolu P, Suhr A, Choi Y , Ha-
jishirzi H, Singh S, Fox R. Do embodied agents dream
of pixelated sheep?: Embodied decision making using
language guided world modelling. In: Workshop on
Reincarnating Reinforcement Learning at ICLR 2023.
2023
140. Zhou W, Peng X, Riedl M. Dialogue shaping: Empow-
ering agents through npc interaction. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2307.15833, 2023
141. Li H, Hao Y , Zhai Y , Qian Z. The hitchhiker’s guide
to program analysis: A journey with large language
models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2308.00245, 2023
142. al. e R. AgentGPT. https://github.com/
reworkd/AgentGPT, 2023
143. al. e E. Ai-legion. https://github.com/
eumemic/ai-legion, 2023
144. al. e J X. Agixt. https://github.com/
Josh-XT/AGiXT, 2023
145. al. e C. Xlang. https://github.com/
xlang-ai/xlang, 2023
146. al. e N. Babyagi. https://github.com/
yoheinakajima, 2023
147. Chase H. langchain. https://docs.langchain.
com/docs/, 2023
148. al. e A M. WorkGPT. https://github.com/
team-openpm/workgpt, 2023
149. al. e F R. LoopGPT. https://github.com/
farizrahman4u/loopgpt, 2023
150. al. e A E. GPT-researcher. https://github.
com/assafelovic/gpt-researcher, 2023
151. Qin Y , Hu S, Lin Y , Chen W, Ding N, Cui G, Zeng Z,
Huang Y , Xiao C, Han C, others . Tool learning with
foundation models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2304.08354,
2023
152. Face H. transformers-agent. https:
//huggingface.co/docs/transformers/
transformers_agents, 2023
153. al. e E. Miniagi. https://github.com/
muellerberndt/mini-agi, 2023
154. al. e T. Superagi. https://github.com/
TransformerOptimus/SuperAGI, 2023
155. Wu Q, Bansal G, Zhang J, Wu Y , Zhang S, Zhu E,
Li B, Jiang L, Zhang X, Wang C. Autogen: Enabling
next-gen llm applications via multi-agent conversation
framework. arXiv preprint arXiv:2308.08155, 2023
156. Chen W, Su Y , Zuo J, Yang C, Yuan C, Qian C, Chan
C M, Qin Y , Lu Y , Xie R, others . Agentverse: Facilitat-
ing multi-agent collaboration and exploring emergent
behaviors in agents. arXiv preprint arXiv:2308.10848,
2023
157. Lee M, Srivastava M, Hardy A, Thickstun J, Durmus E,
Paranjape A, Gerard-Ursin I, Li X L, Ladhak F, Rong F,
others . Evaluating human-language model interaction.
arXiv preprint arXiv:2212.09746, 2022
158. Chan C M, Chen W, Su Y , Yu J, Xue W, Zhang S,
Fu J, Liu Z. Chateval: Towards better llm-based
evaluators through multi-agent debate. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2308.07201, 2023
159. Kang S, Yoon J, Yoo S. Large language models are
few-shot testers: Exploring llm-based general bug re-
production. In: 2023 IEEE /ACM 45th International
Conference on Software Engineering (ICSE). 2023,
2312–2323
160. Jalil S, Rafi S, LaToza T D, Moran K, Lam W. Chatgpt
and software testing education: Promises & perils. In:
2023 IEEE International Conference on Software Test-

---PAGE BREAK---

[Page 40]
40 Front. Comput. Sci., 2025, 0(0): 1–42
ing, Verification and Validation Workshops (ICSTW).
2023, 4130–4137
161. Mehta N, Teruel M, Sanz P F, Deng X, Awadallah
A H, Kiseleva J. Improving grounded language under-
standing in a collaborative environment by interacting
with agents through help feedback. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2304.10750, 2023
162. Chen A, Phang J, Parrish A, Padmakumar V , Zhao C,
Bowman S R, Cho K. Two failures of self-consistency
in the multi-step reasoning of llms. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2305.14279, 2023
163. Choi M, Pei J, Kumar S, Shu C, Jurgens D. Do llms
understand social knowledge? evaluating the sociabil-
ity of large language models with socket benchmark.
arXiv preprint arXiv:2305.14938, 2023
164. Zhang D, Chen L, Zhao Z, Cao R, Yu K. Mobile-env:
An evaluation platform and benchmark for interactive
agents in llm era. arXiv preprint arXiv:2305.08144,
2023
165. Chalamalasetti K, Götze J, Hakimov S, Madureira B,
Sadler P, Schlangen D. clembench: Using game play
to evaluate chat-optimized language models as con-
versational agents. arXiv preprint arXiv:2305.13455,
2023
166. Lin J, Tomlin N, Andreas J, Eisner J. Decision-oriented
dialogue for human-ai collaboration. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2305.20076, 2023
167. Feldt R, Kang S, Yoon J, Yoo S. Towards autonomous
testing agents via conversational large language models.
arXiv preprint arXiv:2306.05152, 2023
168. Liang Y , Zhu L, Yang Y . Tachikuma: Understading
complex interactions with multi-character and novel
objects by large language models. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2307.12573, 2023
169. Liu X, Yu H, Zhang H, Xu Y , Lei X, Lai H, Gu Y , Ding
H, Men K, Yang K, others . Agentbench: Evaluating
llms as agents. arXiv preprint arXiv:2308.03688, 2023
170. Liu Z, Yao W, Zhang J, Xue L, Heinecke S, Murthy
R, Feng Y , Chen Z, Niebles J C, Arpit D, others . Bo-
laa: Benchmarking and orchestrating llm-augmented
autonomous agents. arXiv preprint arXiv:2308.05960,
2023
171. Xu B, Liu X, Shen H, Han Z, Li Y , Yue M, Peng Z,
Liu Y , Yao Z, Xu D. Gentopia. ai: A collaborative
platform for tool-augmented llms. In: Proceedings of
the 2023 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural
Language Processing: System Demonstrations. 2023,
237–245
172. Huang J t, Lam M H, Li E J, Ren S, Wang W, Jiao
W, Tu Z, Lyu M R. Emotionally numb or empathetic?
evaluating how llms feel using emotionbench. arXiv
preprint arXiv:2308.03656, 2023
173. Zhou S, Xu F F, Zhu H, Zhou X, Lo R, Sridhar A,
Cheng X, Bisk Y , Fried D, Alon U, others . Webarena:
A realistic web environment for building autonomous
agents. arXiv preprint arXiv:2307.13854, 2023
174. Banerjee D, Singh P, Avadhanam A, Srivastava S.
Benchmarking llm powered chatbots: methods and
metrics. arXiv preprint arXiv:2308.04624, 2023
175. Zhao W X, Zhou K, Li J, Tang T, Wang X, Hou Y , Min
Y , Zhang B, Zhang J, Dong Z, others . A survey of large
language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2303.18223,
2023
176. Yang J, Jin H, Tang R, Han X, Feng Q, Jiang H, Zhong
S, Yin B, Hu X. Harnessing the power of llms in
practice: A survey on chatgpt and beyond. ACM Trans-
actions on Knowledge Discovery from Data, 2023
177. Wang Y , Zhong W, Li L, Mi F, Zeng X, Huang
W, Shang L, Jiang X, Liu Q. Aligning large lan-
guage models with human: A survey. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2307.12966, 2023
178. Huang J, Chang K C C. Towards reasoning in
large language models: A survey. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2212.10403, 2022
179. Mialon G, Dessì R, Lomeli M, Nalmpantis C, Pasunuru
R, Raileanu R, Rozière B, Schick T, Dwivedi-Yu J,
Celikyilmaz A, others . Augmented language models:
a survey. arXiv preprint arXiv:2302.07842, 2023
180. Chang Y , Wang X, Wang J, Wu Y , Yang L, Zhu K, Chen
H, Yi X, Wang C, Wang Y , others . A survey on evalu-
ation of large language models. ACM Transactions on
Intelligent Systems and Technology, 2023
181. Chang T A, Bergen B K. Language model behavior:
A comprehensive survey. Computational Linguistics,
2024, 1–58
182. Li C, Wang J, Zhu K, Zhang Y , Hou W, Lian J, Xie
X. Emotionprompt: Leveraging psychology for large
language models enhancement via emotional stimulus.
arXiv e-prints, 2023, arXiv–2307
183. Zhuo T Y , Li Z, Huang Y , Shiri F, Wang W, Haffari G,
Li Y F. On robustness of prompt-based semantic pars-
ing with large pre-trained language model: An empiri-
cal study on codex. arXiv preprint arXiv:2301.12868,
2023
184. Gekhman Z, Oved N, Keller O, Szpektor I, Reichart R.
On the robustness of dialogue history representation in
conversational question answering: a comprehensive
study and a new prompt-based method. Transactions of
the Association for Computational Linguistics, 2023,
11: 351–366
185. Ji Z, Lee N, Frieske R, Yu T, Su D, Xu Y , Ishii E, Bang
Y J, Madotto A, Fung P. Survey of hallucination in

---PAGE BREAK---

[Page 41]
Lei Wang et al. A Survey on Large Language Model based Autonomous Agents 41
natural language generation. ACM Computing Surveys,
2023, 55(12): 1–38
Lei Wang is a Ph.D. candidate
at Renmin University of China,
Beijing. His research focuses on
recommender systems and agent-
based large language models.
Chen Ma is currently pursuing a
Master’s degree at Renmin Uni-
versity of China, Beijing, China.
His research interests include rec-
ommender system, agent based on
large language model.
Xueyang Feng is currently study-
ing for a Ph.D. degree at Ren-
min University of China, Beijing,
China. His research interests in-
clude recommender system, agent
based on large language model.
Zeyu Zhang is currently pursuing
a Master’s degree at Renmin Uni-
versity of China, Beijing, China.
His research interests include rec-
ommender system, causal infer-
ence, agent based on large lan-
guage model.
Hao Yang is currently studying for
a Ph.D. degree at Renmin Univer-
sity of China, Beijing, China. His
research interests include recom-
mender system, causal inference.
Jingsen Zhang is currently study-
ing for a Ph.D. degree at Ren-
min University of China, Beijing,
China. His research interests in-
clude recommender system.
Zhi-Yuan Chen is pursuing his
Ph.D. in Gaoling school of Arti-
ficial Intelligence, Renmin Univer-
sity of China. His research mainly
focuses on language model reason-
ing and agent based on large lan-
guage model.
Jiakai Tang is currently pursuing a
Master’s degree at Renmin Univer-
sity of China, Beijing, China. His
research interests include recom-
mender system.
Xu Chen obtained his PhD degree
from Tsinghua University, China.
Before joining Renmin University
of China, he was a postdoc re-
searcher at University College Lon-
don, UK. In the period from March
to September of 2017, he was
studying at Georgia Institute of
Technology, USA, as a visiting scholar. His research
mainly focuses on the recommender system, reinforce-
ment learning and causal inference.

---PAGE BREAK---

[Page 42]
42 Front. Comput. Sci., 2025, 0(0): 1–42
Yankai Lin received his B.E. and
Ph.D. degrees from Tsinghua Uni-
versity in 2014 and 2019. Af-
ter that, he worked as a senior re-
searcher in Tencent WeChat, and
joined Renmin University of China
in 2022 as a tenure-track assistant professor. His main
research interests are pretrained models and natural lan-
guage processing.
Wayne Xin Zhao received his Ph.D.
in Computer Science from Peking
University in 2014. His research
interests include data mining, natu-
ral language processing and infor-
mation retrieval in general. The
main goal is to study how to orga-
nize, analyze and mine user gener-
ated data for improving the service
of real-world applications.
Zhewei Wei received his Ph.D. of
Computer Science and Engineer-
ing from Hong Kong University of
Science and Technology. He did
postdoctoral research in Aarhus
University from 2012 to 2014, and
joined Renmin University of China
in 2014.
Ji-Rong Wen is a full professor, the
executive dean of Gaoling School
of Artificial Intelligence, and the
dean of School of Information at
Renmin University of China. He
has been working in the big data
and AI areas for many years, and publishing extensively
on prestigious international conferences and journals.