[Page 1]
Augmenting large language models with chemistry tools
Andres M. Bran12∗ Sam Cox3∗ Oliver Schilter24
Carlo Baldassari4 Andrew D. White3 Philippe Schwaller12
1 Laboratory of Artificial Chemical Intelligence (LIAC), ISIC, EPFL
2National Centre of Competence in Research (NCCR) Catalysis, EPFL
3 Department of Chemical Engineering, University of Rochester
4 Accelerated Discovery, IBM Research – Europe
∗Contributed equally.
andrew.white@rochester.edu
philippe.schwaller@epfl.ch
Abstract
Over the last decades, excellent computational chemistry tools have been developed.
Integrating them into a single platform with enhanced accessibility could help reaching
their full potential by overcoming steep learning curves. Recently, large-language models
(LLMs) have shown strong performance in tasks across domains, but struggle with
chemistry-related problems. Moreover, these models lack access to external knowledge
sources, limiting their usefulness in scientific applications. In this study, we introduce
ChemCrow, an LLM chemistry agent designed to accomplish tasks across organic
synthesis, drug discovery, and materials design. By integrating 18 expert-designed
tools, ChemCrow augments the LLM performance in chemistry, and new capabilities
emerge. Our agent autonomously planned and executed the syntheses of an insect
repellent, three organocatalysts, and guided the discovery of a novel chromophore. Our
evaluation, including both LLM and expert assessments, demonstrates ChemCrow’s
effectiveness in automating a diverse set of chemical tasks. Surprisingly, we find that
GPT-4 as an evaluator cannot distinguish between clearly wrong GPT-4 completions and
Chemcrow’s performance. Our work not only aids expert chemists and lowers barriers
for non-experts, but also fosters scientific advancement by bridging the gap between
experimental and computational chemistry. Publicly available code can be found at
https://github.com/ur-whitelab/chemcrow-public .
1 Introduction
In the last few years, Language Language Models (LLMs) 1–5 have transformed various sectors by au-
tomating natural language tasks. A prime example of this is the introduction of GitHub Copilot in 2021 6
and more recently StarCoder 7, which provides proposed code completions based on the context of a
file and open windows that increases developers’ productivity8. Most recent advances are based on the
Transformer architecture 9, introduced for neural machine translation and extended to various natural
language processing tasks demonstrating remarkable few-shot and zero-shot performance 2. Nevertheless,
it is crucial to recognize the limitations of LLMs, which often struggle with seemingly simple tasks like
basic mathematics and chemistry operations 10,11. For instance, GPT-4 12 and GPT-3.513 cannot consis-
tently and accurately multiply 12345*98765 or convert IUPAC names into the corresponding molecular
graph 14. These shortcomings can be attributed to the models’ core design, which focuses on predicting
subsequent words. To address these limitations, one viable approach is to augment large language models
with dedicated external tools or plugins, such as a calculator for mathematical operations or OPSIN 15
for IUPAC to structure conversion. These specialized tools provide exact answers, thereby compensating
for the inherent deficiencies of LLMs in specific domains and enhancing their overall performance and
applicability.
Preprint. Under review.
arXiv:2304.05376v5  [physics.chem-ph]  2 Oct 2023

---PAGE BREAK---

[Page 2]
Chemistry, as a field, has been impacted through expert-designed artificial intelligence (AI) systems that
tackle specific problems, such as reaction prediction 16–20, retrosynthesis planning 21–27, molecular property
prediction 28–32, de-novo molecular generation 33,34, materials design 35,36 and, more recently, Bayesian
Optimization 37–39. Due to the nature of their training, it has been shown that code-generating LLMs
do possess some understanding of chemistry 14. By understanding, we mean that LLMs are capable of
adapting to observations, planning over multiple steps, and responding correctly to intent 13,40–44. However,
the automation levels achieved in chemistry remain relatively low compared to other domains, primarily
due to its highly experimental nature, the lack of data, as well as the limited scope and applicability of
computational tools, even within their designated areas45.
Integrating such tools tends to occur within isolated environments, such as RXN for Chemistry18,24,46–48
and AIZynthFinder 25,49,50, facilitated by corporate directives that promote integrability. Although most
tools are developed by the open-source community or made accessible through application programming
interfaces (API), their integration and interoperability pose considerable challenges for experimental
chemists, mainly due to their lack of computational skill set and the diversity of tools with steep learning
curves, thereby preventing the full exploitation of their potential.
Figure 1: Overview and toolset. a) An overview of the task-solving process. Using a variety of chemistry-
related packages and software, a set of tools is created. These tools and a user input are then given to an
LLM. The LLM then proceeds through an automatic, iterative chain-of-thought process, deciding on its
path, choice of tools, and inputs before coming to a final answer. The example shows the synthesis of
DEET, a common insect repellent. b) Toolsets implemented in ChemCrow: reaction, molecule, safety,
search, and standard tools.
Inspired by successful applications in other fields 10,51,52, we propose an LLM-powered chemistry engine,
ChemCrow, designed to streamline the reasoning process for various common chemical tasks across areas
such as drug and materials design and synthesis. ChemCrow harnesses the power of multiple expert-
designed tools for chemistry and operates by prompting an LLM (GPT-4 in our experiments) with specific
instructions about the task and the desired format, as shown in Figure 1a. The LLM is provided with a list
of tool names, descriptions of their utility, and details about the expected input/output. It is then instructed
to answer a user-given prompt using the tools provided when necessary. The model is guided to follow the
Thought, Action, Action Input, Observation format 43, which requires it to reason about the current state
of the task, consider its relevance to the final goal, and plan the next steps accordingly, demonstrating its
level of understanding. After the reasoning in the Thought step, the LLM requests a tool (preceded by the
2

---PAGE BREAK---

[Page 3]
keyword “Action”) and the input for this tool (with the keyword “Action Input”). The text generation then
pauses, and the program attempts to execute the requested function using the provided input. The result is
returned to the LLM prepended by the keyword “Observation”, and the LLM proceeds to the Thought step
again. It continues iteratively until the final answer is reached.
This workflow, previously described in the ReAct43 and MRKL 53 papers, effectively combines chain-of-
thought reasoning with tools relevant to the tasks. As a result, and as will be shown in the following sections,
the LLM transitions from a hyperconfident – although typically wrong – information source, to a reasoning
engine that is prompted to reflect on a task, act using a suitable tool to gather additional information,
observe the tool’s responses, and repeat this loop until the final answer is reached. Contemporaneously
with this work, 54 describes a similar approach of augmenting an LLM with tools for accomplishing
tasks in chemistry that are out of reach of GPT-4 alone. Their focus is specifically on cloud labs, while
ours investigates an extensive range of tasks and tools including the connection to a cloud-connected
robotic synthesis platform. We implemented 18 tools, including web and literature search, as well as
molecule-specific and reaction-specific tools, as shown in Figure 1b and described in Section 5.3, that
endow ChemCrow not only with knowledge about molecular and reaction properties, but also with the
capacity to directly execute tasks in a physical lab. While the list of tools included is not exhaustive,
ChemCrow has been designed to be easily adapted to new applications by providing the tool, along with a
description of its intended use, all through natural language. ChemCrow serves as an assistant to expert
chemists while simultaneously lowering the entry barrier for non-experts by offering a simple interface
to access accurate chemical knowledge. We analyze the capabilities of ChemCrow on 14 use cases (see
Appendix G), including synthesizing target molecules, safety controls, and searching for molecules with
similar modes of action.
2 Results & Discussion
2.1 Autonomous chemical synthesis
From simple user inputs such as Plan and execute the synthesis of an insect repellent (Figure 1a) and
Find and synthesize a thiourea organocatalyst, which accelerates a Diels-Alder reaction. (Figure 2b),
ChemCrow found corresponding molecules, planned syntheses, and executed the syntheses on the cloud-
connected, proprietary RoboRXN platform from IBM Research 55. Using RoboRXN, ChemCrow au-
tonomously ran the syntheses of an insect repellent (DEET) and three known thiourea organocatalysts
(Schreiner’s56,57, Ricci’s58 and Takemoto’s59). To do so, ChemCrow sequentially queried tools, such as
LitSearch/WebSearch, Name2SMILES, ReactionPlanner, and finally, ReactionExecute, to combine the
information and solve the tasks. The synthesized structures are shown in Figure 2d, and the detailed
description of the tools in Section 5.3. The four syntheses yielded the anticipated compounds successfully,
demonstrating synthesis planning and execution-related LLM agent interactions with the physical world.
Standardized synthesis procedures are key for successful execution. However, the predicted procedures46
are not always directly executable on the RoboRXN platform; typical problems include “not enough
solvent” or “invalid purify action”. Addressing these issues requires human interaction to fix the invalid
actions before attempting to execute the synthesis. ChemCrow is able to autonomously query the synthesis
validation data from the platform and iteratively adapt the synthesis procedure (such as increasing solvent
quantity) until the synthesis procedure is fully valid. The ActionCleaner functionality is included in the
ReactionExecute tool, and does not require human intervention. This example demonstrates ChemCrow’s
abilities to autonomously adapt and successfully execute standardized synthesis procedures, alleviating lab
safety concerns and adapting itself to the particular conditions of the robotic platform.
2.2 Human-AI collaboration
The interaction between humans and computers results particularly fruitful, especially in the realm of
chemistry where decisions are often taken based on experimental results, and the execution of experiments
themselves can turn out to be challenging, even beyond the capabilities of cutting-edge self-driving labs.
Here we demonstrate how such an interaction can lead to the discovery of a novel chromophore. For this
example, ChemCrow was instructed to train a machine-learning model to help screen a library of candidate
chromophores. As can be seen in Figure 3, ChemCrow is capable of loading, cleaning, and processing
the data, training and evaluating a Random Forest model, and finally providing a suggestion based on
the model and the given target absorption maximum wavelength of 369nm. The proposed molecule (see
3

---PAGE BREAK---

[Page 4]
Figure 2: Experimental validation. a) Example of the script run by a user to initiate ChemCrow. b)
Query and synthesis of a thiourea organocatalyst. c) The IBM Research RoboRXN synthesis platform
on which the experiments were executed (pictures reprinted courtesy of International Business Machines
Corporation). d) Experimentally validated compounds.
Figure 3) was subsequently synthesized and analyzed, confirming the discovery of a new chromophore
with approximately the desired property (measured absorption maximum wavelength of 336nm).
Human chemist Human-AI collaboration ChemCrow
Task input: 
Here is some chromophore data. 
• Clean the data. 
• Use only data with acetonitrile as solvent.
• Preprocess the data.
• Train a random forest model to predict               
  absorption max wavelength of molecules.
• Then make predictions for the molecules 
   in a selection pool.
• Finally, suggest a synthetic plan for the 
   one with wavelength closest to 369 nm. 
ChemCrow actions:
1. Check data rows to learn the format.
2. Filter data, solvent and relevant columns.
3. Calculate MorganFingerprints and
split dataset into train/test.
4. Train and evaluate random forest model.
5. Propose molecule(s) from the selection pool.
6. Predict 2 step synthetic procedure 
for selected molecule.
Human actions:
• Synthesize proposed molecule. 
• Conﬁrm product using  MS(ESI) and NMR.
• Analyse UV-Vis absorption spectrum.
Wavelength [nm]
Absorbance [AU]
Synthesize (E)-3-methyl-4-(2-(3'-
(methylsulfonamido)-[1,1'-biphenyl]-4-
yl)vinyl)benzoate with a predicted maximum 
absortion wavelenth closest to 369 nm. The 
root mean squared error of the random forest 
model is 37 nm. 
Final answer:
O
O
H
N
S
O
O
O
O
H
N
S
O
O
in Acetonitrile
Figure 3: Human/Model interaction leading to the discovery of a novel chromophore. Left: The
human input, actions, and observation. Right: ChemCrow actions and final answer with the suggestion of
the novel chromophore.
4

---PAGE BREAK---

[Page 5]
2.3 Evaluation across diverse chemical use cases
In recent years, there has been a surge in the application of machine learning to chemistry, resulting in a
wealth of datasets and benchmarks in the field 60,61. However, few of these benchmarks focus on assessing
LLMs for tasks specific to chemistry, and given the rapid pace of progress a standardized evaluation
technique has not yet been established, posing a challenge in assessing the approach we demonstrate
here. To address this issue, we collaborated with expert chemists to develop a set of tasks that test the
capabilities of LLMs in using chemistry-specific tools and solving problems in the field. The selected
tasks are executed by both ChemCrow and GPT-4 (the latter prompted to assume the role of an expert
chemist), and these results are evaluated with a combination of LLM-based and expert human assessments.
For the former, we draw inspiration from the evaluation methods described in5,62,63, where the authors use
an evaluator LLM that is instructed to assume the role of a teacher assessing their students. In our case, we
adapted the prompt so that the evaluator LLM (which we call EvaluatorGPT) only gives a grade based on
whether the task is addressed or not, and whether the overall thought process is correct. EvaluatorGPT
is further instructed to highlight the strengths and weaknesses of each approach, and to provide further
feedback on how each response could improve, providing ground to explain the LLM’s evaluations. Full
results for several tasks, spanning synthetic planning for drugs, design of novel compounds with similar
properties and modes of actions, and explaining reaction mechanisms, are presented in the Appendix G.
The full examples are also available at https://github.com/ur-whitelab/chemcrow-runs .
organic
synthesis
tasks
molecular
design tasks
chemical logic and
knowledge tasks
Increasing difﬁculty
GPT-4
GPT-4 ChemCrow
Consistency across synthetic complexity
Chemical accuracy
Aggregate evaluation scores
a
c
d
b
Expert evaluationsΔ mean expert scores
Complete responses (when possible)
Major hallucination (molecules, reactions, procedures).
Hard to interpret (need for expert modiﬁcations).
No access to up-to-date information.
Chemically accurate solutions.
Modular and extensible.
Occasional ﬂawed conclusions.
Limited by tools’ quality.
General experts’ observations 
Figure 4: Evaluation results. Comparative performance of GPT-4 and ChemCrow across a range of
tasks. a. Per-task preference. For each task, evaluators were asked which response they are more satisfied
with. Tasks are split in three categories: Synthesis, Molecular design, and Chemical logic. Tasks are
sorted by order of difficulty within the classes. b. Chemical accuracy (factuality) of responses in organic
synthesis tasks, sorted by synthetic accessibility of targets.c. Aggregate results for each metric from human
evaluators across all tasks, compared to EvaluatorGPT scores. The error bars represent the confidence
interval (95%).
It is worth noting that the validity of ChemCrow’s responses depend on both the quality of the tools and
the agent’s reasoning process, each of which affects one another throughout ChemCrow’s execution. For
instance, synthetic planning capabilities can benefit from an improved underlying synthesis engine, an
active area of research 23,64,65. Even then, any tool becomes useless if the reasoning behind its usage is
flawed, and garbage inputs are given to the tool. Similarly, inaccurate outputs from the tools can lead
the agent to wrong conclusions. For these reasons, a panel of expert chemists were asked to evaluate
each model’s performance for each task across three dimensions: 1. Correctness of the chemistry, 2.
Quality of reasoning, and 3. Degree of task completion, see the Appendix B. As shown in Figure 4
ChemCrow outperforms the tool-less LLM, especially on more complex tasks where more grounded
5

---PAGE BREAK---

[Page 6]
chemical reasoning is required. GPT-4 on the other hand systematically fails to provide factually accurate
information, however using a more fluent and complete style, making it preferred by EvaluatorGPT; the
hallucinations it produces are nevertheless unveiled upon thorough inspection. As shown in Figure 4a
and 4b, GPT-4 only outperforms ChemCrow at easier tasks, where the objective is very clear and all
necessary information is a part of GPT-4’s training data, allowing it to offer more complete answers based
almost purely on memorization of training data (e.g. synthesis of DEET and paracetamol). In contrast
ChemCrow consistently offers better solutions across multiple objectives and difficulties, resulting in a
strong preference from expert chemists in favor of ChemCrow, showing its potential as a tool for the
practitioner chemist.
Note the difference between the human and the LLM-powered evaluations in Figure 4. While humans
prefer and highly score ChemCrow’s responses across all three proposed metrics, EvaluatorGPT concludes
that on average GPT-4 is a better model, typically basing its results in the fluency and apparent completeness
of its responses. GPT-4 has been recently presented and used as a self-evaluation method 5,62, but these
results indicate that when it lacks the required understanding to answer a prompt, it also lacks information
to evaluate the prompt completions and thus fails to provide a trustworthy assessment, rendering it unusable
for the benchmarking of LLM capabilities whenever factuality plays key roles in evaluation.
3 Risk Mitigation Strategies
The implementation and use of LLM-driven chemistry engines, like ChemCrow, empower non-expert
researchers by facilitating streamlined combination of different expert-designed tools’ outputs. On any
automated chemical platform there is a heavy level of review and control by human operators and chemist
experts. Nevertheless, it is crucial to ensure responsible development and use of LLM agents66–68.
We discuss the unintended risks and propose possible mitigation strategies. Those can be achieved through
foresight and safeguards, still promoting open and transparent science to enable broad oversight and
feedback from the research community.
Unintended Risks It is a worldwide standard safety guideline to provide access to chemical laboratories
only to trained chemists. However, attempting to perform experiments based on the LLM-powered engine’s
recommendations may lead to accidents or hazardous situations. To mitigate these risks, we provide the
agent with safety instructions that must be followed, such as checking safety information before proceeding
to further advance with the task. As shown in Figure 5, ChemCrow follows a set of hard-coded guidelines
(see Appendix D) by checking that the queried molecules are not known controlled chemicals and other
safety information; execution stops in such a case. In case not, execution proceeds, and this information
is reused by the model to provide a more complete answer including safety concerns of the suggested
substances, as well as grounded recommendations on how to safely handle them. An additional and more
general mitigation strategy could involve incorporating safety checks and expert review systems, ensuring
that recommendations adhere to established safety standards and protocols.
Inaccurate or incomplete reasoning due to a lack of sufficient chemistry knowledge in the LLM-powered
engine poses a another risk, as it may lead to flawed decision-making or problematic experiment results.
One of the key points of this paper is that the integration of expert-designed tools can help mitigate the
hallucination issues commonly associated with these models, thus reducing the risk of inaccuracy. However,
concerns may still arise when the model is unable to adequately analyze different observations due to a
limited understanding of chemistry concepts, potentially leading to suboptimal outcomes. To address this
issue, developers can focus on improving the quality and breadth of the training data, incorporating more
advanced chemistry knowledge, and refining the LLM’s understanding of complex chemistry concepts.
Additionally, a built-in validation or peer-review system, analog to the RLHF implemented for GPT-3.569,70,
could be incorporated to help ensure the reliability of the engine’s recommendations.
Encouraging users to critically evaluate the information provided by the LLM-powered engine and cross-
reference it with established literature and expert opinions can further mitigate the risk of relying on flawed
reasoning 71. By combining these approaches, developers can work towards minimizing the impact of
insufficient chemistry knowledge on the engine’s reasoning process and enhancing the overall effectiveness
of LLM-powered chemistry engines72 like ChemCrow.
Addressing intellectual property issues is crucial for the responsible development and use of generative AI
models 73, like ChemCrow. Clearer guidelines and policies regarding the ownership of generated syntheses
of chemical structures or materials, their predicted applications, as well as the potential infringement
6

---PAGE BREAK---

[Page 7]
Figure 5: Safety guidelines provided by ChemCrow Example task, where safety information is explicitly
requested along with the synthesis procedure for paracetamol (left). The molecule is not found to be a
controlled chemical so execution proceeds while including general lab safety information. In cases where
the input molecule is found to be a controlled chemical (right), execution stops with a warning indicating
that it is illegal and unethical to propose compounds with similar properties to a controlled chemical.
of proprietary information, need to be established. Collaboration with legal experts, as well as industry
stakeholders, can help in navigating these complex issues and implementing appropriate measures to
protect intellectual property.
In summary, it is crucial to carefully consider and address the potential drawbacks associated with LLM-
powered chemistry engines, such as ChemCrow, to ensure their safe and responsible application. By
integrating expert-designed tools, the issue of model hallucination can be mitigated, while improving the
quality and breadth of training data can enhance the engine’s understanding of complex chemistry concepts.
Implementing effective mitigation strategies, such as access controls, safety guidelines, and ethical policies,
further contributes to minimizing risks and maximizing the positive impact of these engines on the field of
chemistry. As the technology continues to evolve, collaboration and vigilance among developers, users, and
industry stakeholders are essential in identifying and addressing new risks and challenges74,75, fostering
responsible innovation and progress in the domain of LLM-powered chemistry engines.
4 Conclusion
In this study, we have demonstrated the development of ChemCrow, a novel LLM-powered method for
integrating computational tools in chemistry. By combining the reasoning power of LLMs with the chemical
expert knowledge from computational tools, ChemCrow showcases one of the first chemistry-related LLM
agent interactions with the physical world. ChemCrow has successfully planned and synthesized an insect
repellent, three organocatalysts, and guided the screening and synthesis of a novel chromophore with target
7

---PAGE BREAK---

[Page 8]
properties. Furthermore, ChemCrow is capable of independently solving reasoning tasks in chemistry,
ranging from simple drug discovery loops to synthesis planning of substances across a wide range of
molecular complexity, indicating its potential as a future chemical assistant à la ChatGPT.
Although the current results are limited by the amount and quality of the chosen tools, the space of possi-
bilities is vast, particularly as potential tools are not restricted to the chemistry domain. The incorporation
of other language-based tools, image processing tools, and more could significantly enhance ChemCrow’s
capabilities. Additionally, while the selected evaluation tasks are limited, further research and development
can expand and diversify these tasks to truly push the limits of what these systems can achieve.
Evaluation by expert chemists revealed that ChemCrow outperforms GPT-4 in terms of chemical factuality,
reasoning and completeness of responses, particularly for increasingly complex tasks. Although GPT-4
may perform better for tasks that involve memorization, such as the synthesis of well-known molecules
like paracetamol and aspirin, ChemCrow excels when tasks are novel or less known, which are the most
useful and challenging cases. In contrast, LLM-powered evaluation tends to favor GPT-4, primarily due
to the more fluent and complete-looking nature of its responses. However, it is important to note that the
LLM-powered evaluation may not be as reliable as human evaluation in assessing the true effectiveness
of the models in chemical reasoning. This discrepancy highlights the need for further refining evaluation
methods to better capture the unique capabilities of systems like ChemCrow in solving complex, real-world
chemistry problems.
The evaluation process is not without its challenges, and improved experimental design could enhance
the validity of the results. One major challenge is the lack of reproducibility of individual results under
the current API-based approach to LLMs, as closed-source models provide limited control, see Appendix
E. Recent open-source models 76–78 offer a potential solution to this issue, albeit with a possible trade-off
in reasoning power. Additionally, implicit bias in task selection and the inherent limitations of testing
chemical logic behind task solutions on a large scale present difficulties for evaluating ML systems.
Despite these challenges, our results demonstrate the promising capabilities and potential of systems like
ChemCrow to serve as valuable assistants in chemical laboratories and to address chemical tasks across
diverse domains.
5 Methods
5.1 LLMs
The rise of LLMs in the last years, and their quick advancement, availability, and scaling in the last months,
have opened the door to a wide range of applications and ideas. Usage of LLMs is further overpowered
when used as part of some frameworks designed to exploit their zero-shot reasoning capabilities, as can
be demonstrated by architectures like ReAct 43 and MRKL 53. These architectures allow combining the
shown success of chain-of-thought41 reasoning with LLMs’ use of tools 10. For our experiments, we used
OpenAI’s GPT-412 with a temperature of 0.1.
5.2 LLMs application framework – LangChain
LangChain 79 is a comprehensive framework designed to facilitate the development of language model
applications by providing support for various modules, including access to various LLMs, prompts,
document loaders, chains, indexes, agents, memory, and chat functionality. With these modules, LangChain
enables users to create various applications such as chatbots, question answering systems, summarization
tools, and data-augmented generation systems. LangChain not only offers standard interfaces for these
modules but also assists in integrating with external tools, experimenting with different prompts and
models, and evaluating the performance of generative models. In our implementation, we integrate external
tools through LangChain, as LLMs have been shown to perform better with tools10,32,80.
5.3 Tools
Although our implementation uses a limited set of tools, it must be noted that this tool set can very easily
be expanded depending on needs and availability.
The tools used can be classified into general tools, molecular tools, and chemical reaction tools.
8

---PAGE BREAK---

[Page 9]
5.3.1 General tools
WebSearch The web search tool is designed to provide the language model with the ability to access
relevant information from the web. Utilizing SerpAPI81, the tool queries search engines and compiles a
selection of impressions from the first page of Google search results. This allows the model to collect
current and relevant information across a broad range of scientific topics. A distinct characteristic of this
instrument is its capacity to act as a launching pad when the model encounters a query it cannot tackle
or is unsure of the suitable tool to apply. Integrating this tool enables the language model to efficiently
expand its knowledge base, streamline the process of addressing common scientific challenges, and verify
the precision and dependability of the information it offers. By default, LitSearch is preferred by the agent
over the WebSearch tool.
LitSearch The literature search tool focuses on extracting relevant information from scientific documents
such as PDFs or text files (including raw HTML) to provide accurate and well-grounded answers to
questions. This tool utilizes the paper-qa python package (https://github.com/whitead/paper-qa). By
leveraging OpenAI Embeddings82 and FAISS83, a vector database, the tool embeds and searches through
documents efficiently. A language model then aids in generating answers based on these embedded vectors.
The literature search process involves embedding documents and queries into vectors and searching for
the top k passages in the documents. Once these relevant passages have been identified, the tool creates a
summary of each passage in relation to the query. These summaries are then incorporated into the prompt,
allowing the language model to generate an informed answer. By anchoring responses in the existing
scientific literature, the literature search tool significantly enhances the model’s capacity to provide reliable
and accurate information for routine scientific tasks, while also including references to the relevant papers.
Python REPL One of Langchain’s standard tools, python REPL provides ChemCrow with a functional
Python shell. This tool enables the LLM to write and run Python code directly, making it easier to
accomplish a wide range of complex tasks. These tasks can range from performing numerical computations
to training AI models and performing data analysis.
Human This tool serves as a direct interface for human interaction, allowing the engine to ask a question
and expect a response from the user. The LLM may request such tool whenever encounters difficulty or
uncertainty regarding the next step. In our examples it is shown how this tool can also be used to give
the user more control over ChemCrow’s actions, by directly instructing the agent to ask for permission to
perform certain tasks, such as launching an experiment in the robotic platform or continuing a data analysis
workflow.
5.3.2 Molecule tools
Name2SMILES This tool is specifically designed to obtain the SMILES representation of a given
molecule. By taking the name (or CAS number) of a molecule as input, it returns the corresponding
SMILES string. The tool allows users to request tasks involving molecular analysis and manipulation,
by referencing the molecule in natural language (e.g. caffeine, novastatine, etc), IUPAC names, etc. Our
implementation queries chem-space 84 as a primary source, and upon failure queries PubChem85 and the
IUPAC to SMILES converter OPSIN86 as a last option.
SMILES2Price The purpose of this tool is to provide information on the purchasability and commercial
cost of a specific molecule. By taking a molecule as input, it first utilizes molbloom 87 to check whether the
molecule is available for purchase (in ZINC2088). Then, using chem-space API 84, it returns the cheapest
price available on the market, enabling the LLM to make informed decisions about the affordability and
availability of the queried molecule toward the resolution of a given task.
Name2CAS The tool is designed to determine the Chemical Abstracts Service (CAS) number of a given
molecule, using either a various types of input references such as common names, IUPAC names, or
SMILES strings by querying the PubChem 85 database. By converting these molecular representations into
the unique CAS number, it greatly facilitates web searches and information retrieval for any molecule.
The CAS number serves as a precise and universally recognized chemical identifier, enabling researchers
to access relevant data and resources with ease, and ensuring that they obtain accurate and consistent
information about the target molecule89.
9

---PAGE BREAK---

[Page 10]
Similarity The primary function of this tool is to evaluate the similarity between two molecules, utilizing
the Tanimoto similarity measure90 based on the ECFP2 molecular fingerprints91 of the input molecules.
This tool receives two molecules and returns a measure of the molecules’ structural similarity, which is
valuable for assessing the potential of molecular analogs in various applications, such as drug discovery
and chemical research. This tool allows the model to calculate and compare the similarity between pairs
of molecules. The Tanimoto similarity approach provides a robust and reliable comparison of molecular
structures, allowing scientists to make informed decisions when exploring new molecular candidates or
investigating structure-activity relationships.
ModifyMol This tool is designed to make alterations to a given molecule by generating a local chemical
space around it using retro and forward synthesis rules. It employs the SynSpace package 92, originally
applied in counterfactual explanations for molecular machine learning 93. The modification process utilizes
50 robust medchem reactions 94, and the retrosynthesis is performed either via PostEra Manifold 18,95
(upon availability of an API key) or by reversing the 50 robust reactions. The purchasable building blocks
come from the Purchasable Mcule supplier building block catalogs 96, although customization options are
available. By taking the SMILES representation of a molecule as input, this tool returns a single modified
molecule resulting from a small change. This tool gives the model the ability to explore structurally similar
molecules and generate novel molecules. This enables researchers to explore new molecular structures,
derivatives, and fine-tune their molecular candidates for specific applications, such as drug discovery and
chemical research.
PatentCheck The patent checker tool is designed to verify whether a molecule has been patented or not,
without the need for a web request. It utilizes molbloom 87, a C library to check strings against a bloom
filter, making it an efficient tool to assess compounds against known databases. The primary application of
this tool, which is used in our implementations, is to determine if a molecule can be purchased by checking
against the ZINC database of purchasable compounds. By taking a molecule’s SMILES representation as
input, the patent checker tool informs the LLM if a patent exists for that particular molecule, thus helping
it avoid potential intellectual property conflicts and determine whether a given compound is novel.
FuncGroups This tool is designed to identify functional groups within a given molecule by analyzing
a list of named SMARTS (SMiles ARbitrary Target Specification) patterns. By taking the SMILES
representation of a single molecule as input, the functional group finder searches for matches between the
molecule’s structure and the predefined SMARTS patterns representing various functional groups.
Upon identifying these matches, the tool returns a list of functional groups present in the molecule. This
information is essential for understanding the molecule’s reactivity, properties, and potential applications in
various scientific domains, such as drug discovery, chemical research, and materials science. By providing
a comprehensive overview of a molecule’s functional groups, the LLM can make informed decisions when
designing experiments, synthesizing compounds, or exploring new molecular candidates.
SMILES2Weight The purpose of this tool is to calculate the molecular weight of a molecule, given a
SMILES representation of that molecule. This tool utilizes RDKit 97 to get the exact molecular weight
from a SMILES string.
5.3.3 Safety tools
As mentioned in previous sections, safety is one of the most prominent issues regarding the development
of tools like ChemCrow. One of the risk mitigation strategies that has been proposed is to provide built-in
safety-assessment functionalities, that allow the LLM to assess the potential risks of any proposed molecule,
reaction or procedure.
ControlledChemicalCheck Created to reduce unintended risks, this tool takes a molecule’s CAS
number and checks it against several lists of recognized Chemical Weapons and Precursors (Organisation
for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons Schedules 1-3 98 and The Australia Group’s Export Control
List: Chemical Weapons Precursors99). This tool is automatically invoked when a request is made for a
synthesis method or execution for a given molecule. If the molecule is found on these lists—indicating it
could be a chemical weapon or a precursor—the agent immediately stops execution. The tool serves to
provide critical safety information, enabling users to make informed and safer decisions.
10

---PAGE BREAK---

[Page 11]
ExplosiveCheck This tool utilizes the Globally Harmonized System (GHS) to identify explosive
molecules. It queries the PubChem database using molecular identifiers like common name, IUPAC
name, or CAS number. If the molecule’s GHS rating is "Explosive", the tool confirms its explosive nature.
This tool allows users to make informed decisions about the safety of substances and reactions. In addition,
ChemCrow automatically invokes this tool when a user requests a synthesis method, giving an appropriate
warning or error to the user, thereby mitigating associated risks.
SafetySummary This tool provides a general safety overview for any given molecule. It produces
a safety summary by querying data from the PubChem database 85 and uses an LLM as interface to
highlight four central aspects: Operational safety (potential risks for the operator, i.e. health concerns of
handling the given substance), GHS information (general hazards and recommendations to handle the
substance), environmental risks (any environamental concerns of the handling of the substance, along with
recommendations for how to handle it), and societal impact: whether the substance is a known controlled
chemical. Whenever no information is available, the LLM is permitted to fill in the gaps while explicitly
stating so. In that case, GPT-4 is permitted to fill in the gaps, but must explicitly state so. This tool provides
comprehensive and digestible safety information from the PubChem database, enabling users to make
informed decisions and to take appropriate safety measures. Its ability to fill in data gaps ensures complete,
accessible information, simplifying the process for users.
5.3.4 Chemical reaction tools
NameRXN This tool, powered by the proprietary software NameRxn from NextMove Software100, is
designed to identify and classify a given chemical reaction based on its internal database of several hundred
named reactions. By taking a reaction SMILES, the tool returns a classification code and the reaction name
in natural language. The classification code corresponds to a position in the hierarchy proposed by Carey,
Laffan, Thomson, and Williams101. This information is essential for understanding reaction mechanisms,
selecting appropriate catalysts, and optimizing experimental conditions.
ReactionPredict The reaction prediction tool leverages the RXN4Chemistry API from IBM Research 48,
which utilizes a transformer model specifically tailored for predicting chemical reactions and retrosynthesis
paths based on the Molecular Transformer 18,24 and provides highly accurate predictions. This tool takes as
input a set of reactants and returns the predicted product, allowing the LLM to have accurate chemical
information that can’t typically be obtained by a simple database query, but that requires a sort of abstract
reasoning chemists are trained to perform. While the API is free to use, registration is required.
ReactionPlanner This powerful tool also employs the RXN4Chemistry API from IBM Research 18,24,48,
utilizing the same Transformer approach for translation tasks as the reaction prediction tool, but adding
search algorithms to handle multi-step synthesis, and an action prediction algorithm that converts a reaction
sequence into actionable steps in machine-readable format, including conditions, additives, and solvents102.
To interface with ChemCrow, we added an LLM processing step that converts these machine-readable
actions into natural language. The molecular synthesis planner is designed to assist the LLM in planning a
synthetic route to prepare a desired target molecule. By taking the SMILES representation of the desired
product as input, this tool enables ChemCrow to devise and compare efficient synthetic pathways toward
the target compound.
ReactionExecute This tool allows ChemCrow direct interaction with the physical world through a
robotic chemistry lab platform. Also based on the RXN4Chemistry API, the tool allows the agent to plan,
adapt, and execute the synthesis of a given molecule. Internally, the tool requests a synthesis plan (using
the RXNPlanner tool), obtains the action sequence to be executed on the robot, and uses a LLM-powered
loop to adapt the errors and warnings in the action sequence. Finally it requests permission from the user
to launch the synthesis, and returns a success message upon successful launching the action sequence.
Data & Code availability
All the experiments carried out in this study can be found under https://github.com/ur-whitelab/
chemcrow-runs. Additionally, an open-source version of the ChemCrow platform has been released at
https://github.com/ur-whitelab/chemcrow-public , which includes the main agent setup and a
subset of 12 tools used in the original implementation.
11

---PAGE BREAK---

[Page 12]
Acknowledgements
A.M.B., O.S. and P.S. acknowledge support from the NCCR Catalysis (grant number 180544), a National
Centre of Competence in Research funded by the Swiss National Science Foundation. S.C. and A.D.W.
acknowledge support from the NSF under grant number 1751471. Research reported in this work was
supported by the National Institute of General Medical Sciences of the National Institutes of Health under
award number R35GM137966. The authors thank the wider RXN for Chemistry team for the support and
having granted limited access to the platform for the sole scope of executing the reported syntheses.
References
[1] Devlin, J.; Chang, M.-W.; Lee, K.; Toutanova, K. Bert: Pre-training of deep bidirectional transform-
ers for language understanding. arXiv preprint arXiv:1810.04805 2018,
[2] Brown, T.; Mann, B.; Ryder, N.; Subbiah, M.; Kaplan, J. D.; Dhariwal, P.; Neelakantan, A.;
Shyam, P.; Sastry, G.; Askell, A., et al. Language models are few-shot learners.Advances in neural
information processing systems 2020, 33, 1877–1901.
[3] Bommasani, R.; Hudson, D. A.; Adeli, E.; Altman, R.; Arora, S.; von Arx, S.; Bernstein, M. S.;
Bohg, J.; Bosselut, A.; Brunskill, E., et al. On the opportunities and risks of foundation models.
arXiv preprint arXiv:2108.07258 2021,
[4] Chowdhery, A.; Narang, S.; Devlin, J.; Bosma, M.; Mishra, G.; Roberts, A.; Barham, P.;
Chung, H. W.; Sutton, C.; Gehrmann, S., et al. Palm: Scaling language modeling with pathways.
arXiv preprint arXiv:2204.02311 2022,
[5] Bubeck, S.; Chandrasekaran, V .; Eldan, R.; Gehrke, J.; Horvitz, E.; Kamar, E.; Lee, P.; Lee, Y . T.;
Li, Y .; Lundberg, S., et al. Sparks of artificial general intelligence: Early experiments with gpt-4.
arXiv preprint arXiv:2303.12712 2023,
[6] GitHub Copilot: Your AI pair programmer. https://copilot.github.com.
[7] Li, R. et al. StarCoder: may the source be with you! 2023.
[8] Ziegler, A.; Kalliamvakou, E.; Li, X. A.; Rice, A.; Rifkin, D.; Simister, S.; Sittampalam, G.;
Aftandilian, E. Productivity assessment of neural code completion. 2022, 21–29.
[9] Vaswani, A.; Shazeer, N.; Parmar, N.; Uszkoreit, J.; Jones, L.; Gomez, A. N.; Kaiser, Ł.; Polo-
sukhin, I. Attention is all you need. Advances in neural information processing systems 2017,
30.
[10] Schick, T.; Dwivedi-Yu, J.; Dessì, R.; Raileanu, R.; Lomeli, M.; Zettlemoyer, L.; Cancedda, N.;
Scialom, T. Toolformer: Language models can teach themselves to use tools. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2302.04761 2023,
[11] Castro Nascimento, C. M.; Pimentel, A. S. Do Large Language Models Understand Chemistry? A
Conversation with ChatGPT. Journal of Chemical Information and Modeling 2023, 63, 1649–1655.
[12] OpenAI, GPT-4 Technical Report. 2023.
[13] Ouyang, L.; Wu, J.; Jiang, X.; Almeida, D.; Wainwright, C.; Mishkin, P.; Zhang, C.; Agarwal, S.;
Slama, K.; Ray, A., et al. Training language models to follow instructions with human feedback.
Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems 2022, 35, 27730–27744.
[14] White, A. D.; Hocky, G. M.; Gandhi, H. A.; Ansari, M.; Cox, S.; Wellawatte, G. P.; Sasmal, S.;
Yang, Z.; Liu, K.; Singh, Y ., et al. Assessment of chemistry knowledge in large language models
that generate code. Digital Discovery 2023,
[15] Lowe, D. M.; Corbett, P. T.; Murray-Rust, P.; Glen, R. C. Chemical Name to Structure: OPSIN, an
Open Source Solution. Journal of Chemical Information and Modeling 2011, 51, 739–753, PMID:
21384929.
[16] Coley, C. W.; Barzilay, R.; Jaakkola, T. S.; Green, W. H.; Jensen, K. F. Prediction of organic reaction
outcomes using machine learning. ACS central science 2017, 3, 434–443.
12

---PAGE BREAK---

[Page 13]
[17] Coley, C. W.; Jin, W.; Rogers, L.; Jamison, T. F.; Jaakkola, T. S.; Green, W. H.; Barzilay, R.;
Jensen, K. F. A graph-convolutional neural network model for the prediction of chemical reactivity.
Chem. Sci. 2019, 10, 370–377.
[18] Schwaller, P.; Laino, T.; Gaudin, T.; Bolgar, P.; Hunter, C. A.; Bekas, C.; Lee, A. A. Molecular
transformer: a model for uncertainty-calibrated chemical reaction prediction. ACS central science
2019, 5, 1572–1583.
[19] Pesciullesi, G.; Schwaller, P.; Laino, T.; Reymond, J.-L. Transfer learning enables the molecular
transformer to predict regio-and stereoselective reactions on carbohydrates. Nat. Commun. 2020, 11,
1–8.
[20] Irwin, R.; Dimitriadis, S.; He, J.; Bjerrum, E. J. Chemformer: a pre-trained transformer for
computational chemistry. Machine Learning: Science and Technology 2022, 3, 015022.
[21] Szymku´c, S.; Gajewska, E. P.; Klucznik, T.; Molga, K.; Dittwald, P.; Startek, M.; Bajczyk, M.;
Grzybowski, B. A. Computer-assisted synthetic planning: the end of the beginning. Angew. Chem. -
Int. Ed. 2016, 55, 5904–5937.
[22] Segler, M. H.; Preuss, M.; Waller, M. P. Planning chemical syntheses with deep neural networks and
symbolic AI. Nature 2018, 555, 604–610.
[23] Coley, C. W.; Thomas, D. A.; Lummiss, J. A.; Jaworski, J. N.; Breen, C. P.; Schultz, V .; Hart, T.;
Fishman, J. S.; Rogers, L.; Gao, H., et al. A robotic platform for flow synthesis of organic compounds
informed by AI planning. Science 2019, 365.
[24] Schwaller, P.; Petraglia, R.; Zullo, V .; Nair, V . H.; Haeuselmann, R. A.; Pisoni, R.; Bekas, C.;
Iuliano, A.; Laino, T. Predicting retrosynthetic pathways using transformer-based models and a
hyper-graph exploration strategy. Chemical science 2020, 11, 3316–3325.
[25] Genheden, S.; Thakkar, A.; Chadimová, V .; Reymond, J.-L.; Engkvist, O.; Bjerrum, E. AiZyn-
thFinder: a fast, robust and flexible open-source software for retrosynthetic planning. J. Cheminf.
2020, 12, 1–9.
[26] Molga, K.; Szymku´c, S.; Grzybowski, B. A. Chemist Ex Machina: Advanced Synthesis Planning by
Computers. Acc. Chem. Res. 2021, 54, 1094–1106.
[27] Schwaller, P.; Vaucher, A. C.; Laplaza, R.; Bunne, C.; Krause, A.; Corminboeuf, C.; Laino, T.
Machine intelligence for chemical reaction space. Wiley Interdisciplinary Reviews: Computational
Molecular Science 2022, 12, e1604.
[28] Mayr, A.; Klambauer, G.; Unterthiner, T.; Hochreiter, S. DeepTox: toxicity prediction using deep
learning. Frontiers in Environmental Science2016, 3, 80.
[29] Yang, K.; Swanson, K.; Jin, W.; Coley, C.; Eiden, P.; Gao, H.; Guzman-Perez, A.; Hopper, T.;
Kelley, B.; Mathea, M., et al. Analyzing learned molecular representations for property prediction.
Journal of chemical information and modeling 2019, 59, 3370–3388.
[30] Chithrananda, S.; Grand, G.; Ramsundar, B. Chemberta: Large-scale self-supervised pretraining for
molecular property prediction. arXiv preprint arXiv:2010.09885 2020,
[31] van Tilborg, D.; Alenicheva, A.; Grisoni, F. Exposing the limitations of molecular machine learning
with activity cliffs. Journal of Chemical Information and Modeling 2022, 62, 5938–5951.
[32] Jablonka, K. M.; Schwaller, P.; Ortega-Guerrero, A.; Smit, B. Is GPT-3 all you need for low-data
discovery in chemistry? 2023,
[33] Gómez-Bombarelli, R.; Wei, J. N.; Duvenaud, D.; Hernández-Lobato, J. M.; Sánchez-Lengeling, B.;
Sheberla, D.; Aguilera-Iparraguirre, J.; Hirzel, T. D.; Adams, R. P.; Aspuru-Guzik, A. Automatic
Chemical Design Using a Data-Driven Continuous Representation of Molecules. ACS Cent. Sci.
2018, 4, 268–276, PMID: 29532027.
[34] Blaschke, T.; Arús-Pous, J.; Chen, H.; Margreitter, C.; Tyrchan, C.; Engkvist, O.; Papadopoulos, K.;
Patronov, A. REINVENT 2.0: an AI tool for de novo drug design. Journal of chemical information
and modeling 2020, 60, 5918–5922.
13

---PAGE BREAK---

[Page 14]
[35] Tao, Q.; Xu, P.; Li, M.; Lu, W. Machine learning for perovskite materials design and discovery.npj
Computational Materials 2021, 7, 1–18, Number: 1 Publisher: Nature Publishing Group.
[36] Gómez-Bombarelli, R. et al. Design of efficient molecular organic light-emitting diodes by a high-
throughput virtual screening and experimental approach. Nature Materials 2016, 15, 1120–1127,
Number: 10 Publisher: Nature Publishing Group.
[37] Shields, B. J.; Stevens, J.; Li, J.; Parasram, M.; Damani, F.; Alvarado, J. I. M.; Janey, J. M.;
Adams, R. P.; Doyle, A. G. Bayesian reaction optimization as a tool for chemical synthesis. Nature
2021, 590, 89–96.
[38] Torres, J. A. G.; Lau, S. H.; Anchuri, P.; Stevens, J. M.; Tabora, J. E.; Li, J.; Borovika, A.;
Adams, R. P.; Doyle, A. G. A Multi-Objective Active Learning Platform and Web App for Reaction
Optimization. Journal of the American Chemical Society 2022, 144, 19999–20007.
[39] Ramos, M. C.; Michtavy, S. S.; Porosoff, M. D.; White, A. D. Bayesian Optimization of Catalysts
With In-context Learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2304.05341 2023,
[40] Marra, G.; Giannini, F.; Diligenti, M.; Gori, M. Integrating learning and reasoning with deep logic
models. 2020, 517–532.
[41] Wei, J.; Wang, X.; Schuurmans, D.; Bosma, M.; Chi, E.; Le, Q.; Zhou, D. Chain of thought
prompting elicits reasoning in large language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2201.11903 2022,
[42] Ho, N.; Schmid, L.; Yun, S.-Y . Large Language Models Are Reasoning Teachers.arXiv preprint
arXiv:2212.10071 2022,
[43] Yao, S.; Zhao, J.; Yu, D.; Du, N.; Shafran, I.; Narasimhan, K.; Cao, Y . React: Synergizing reasoning
and acting in language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2210.03629 2022,
[44] Zelikman, E.; Wu, Y .; Mu, J.; Goodman, N. Star: Bootstrapping reasoning with reasoning.Advances
in Neural Information Processing Systems 2022, 35, 15476–15488.
[45] Zhao, Z.-W.; del Cueto, M.; Troisi, A. Limitations of machine learning models when predicting
compounds with completely new chemistries: possible improvements applied to the discovery of
new non-fullerene acceptors. Digital Discovery 2022, 1, 266–276.
[46] Vaucher, A. C.; Schwaller, P.; Geluykens, J.; Nair, V . H.; Iuliano, A.; Laino, T. Inferring experimental
procedures from text-based representations of chemical reactions. Nature communications 2021, 12,
2573.
[47] Schwaller, P.; Probst, D.; Vaucher, A. C.; Nair, V . H.; Kreutter, D.; Laino, T.; Reymond, J.-L.
Mapping the space of chemical reactions using attention-based neural networks. Nature machine
intelligence 2021, 3, 144–152.
[48] rxn4Chemistry, rxn4Chemistry. https://github.com/rxn4chemistry/rxn4chemistry,
2020; Accessed: April 2023.
[49] Thakkar, A.; Kogej, T.; Reymond, J.-L.; Engkvist, O.; Bjerrum, E. J. Datasets and their influence
on the development of computer assisted synthesis planning tools in the pharmaceutical domain.
Chemical science 2020, 11, 154–168.
[50] Thakkar, A.; Selmi, N.; Reymond, J.-L.; Engkvist, O.; Bjerrum, E. J. “Ring breaker”: neural network
driven synthesis prediction of the ring system chemical space. Journal of medicinal chemistry 2020,
63, 8791–8808.
[51] Yang, Z.; Li, L.; Wang, J.; Lin, K.; Azarnasab, E.; Ahmed, F.; Liu, Z.; Liu, C.; Zeng, M.;
Wang, L. MM-REACT: Prompting ChatGPT for Multimodal Reasoning and Action.arXiv preprint
arXiv:2303.11381 2023,
[52] Shen, Y .; Song, K.; Tan, X.; Li, D.; Lu, W.; Zhuang, Y . HuggingGPT: Solving AI Tasks with
ChatGPT and its Friends in HuggingFace. 2023.
14

---PAGE BREAK---

[Page 15]
[53] Karpas, E.; Abend, O.; Belinkov, Y .; Lenz, B.; Lieber, O.; Ratner, N.; Shoham, Y .; Bata, H.;
Levine, Y .; Leyton-Brown, K., et al. MRKL Systems: A modular, neuro-symbolic architecture that
combines large language models, external knowledge sources and discrete reasoning. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2205.00445 2022,
[54] Boiko, D. A.; MacKnight, R.; Gomes, G. Emergent autonomous scientific research capabilities of
large language models. arXiv preprint 2023,
[55] IBM RoboRXN | Science | IBM Research — research.ibm.com. https://research.ibm.com/
science/ibm-roborxn/, [Accessed 12-May-2023].
[56] Wittkopp, A.; Schreiner, P. R. Metal-Free, Noncovalent Catalysis of Diels–Alder Reactions by
Neutral Hydrogen Bond Donors in Organic Solvents and in Water.Chemistry – A European Journal
2003, 9, 407–414.
[57] Schreiner, P. R.; Wittkopp, A. H-Bonding Additives Act Like Lewis Acid Catalysts.Organic Letters
2002, 4, 217–220, Publisher: American Chemical Society.
[58] Herrera, R. P.; Sgarzani, V .; Bernardi, L.; Ricci, A. Catalytic Enantioselective Friedel–Crafts
Alkylation of Indoles with Nitroalkenes by Using a Simple Thiourea Organocatalyst. Angewandte
Chemie International Edition 2005, 44, 6576–6579.
[59] Okino, T.; Hoashi, Y .; Takemoto, Y . Enantioselective Michael Reaction of Malonates to Nitroolefins
Catalyzed by Bifunctional Organocatalysts. Journal of the American Chemical Society 2003, 125,
12672–12673, Publisher: American Chemical Society.
[60] Lowe, D. M. Extraction of chemical structures and reactions from the literature. Ph.D. thesis,
University of Cambridge, 2012.
[61] Wu, Z.; Ramsundar, B.; Feinberg, E. N.; Gomes, J.; Geniesse, C.; Pappu, A. S.; Leswing, K.;
Pande, V . MoleculeNet: a benchmark for molecular machine learning.Chemical science 2018, 9,
513–530.
[62] Liu, Y .; Iter, D.; Xu, Y .; Wang, S.; Xu, R.; Zhu, C. GPTEval: NLG Evaluation using GPT-4 with
Better Human Alignment. arXiv preprint arXiv:2303.16634 2023,
[63] Eloundou, T.; Manning, S.; Mishkin, P.; Rock, D. Gpts are gpts: An early look at the labor market
impact potential of large language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2303.10130 2023,
[64] Grzybowski, B. A.; Badowski, T.; Molga, K.; Szymku´c, S. Network search algorithms and scoring
functions for advanced-level computerized synthesis planning. WIREs Computational Molecular
Science 2023, 13, e1630.
[65] Thakkar, A.; Johansson, S.; Jorner, K.; Buttar, D.; Reymond, J.-L.; Engkvist, O. Artificial intelli-
gence and automation in computer aided synthesis planning. Reaction chemistry & engineering
2021, 6, 27–51.
[66] Urbina, F.; Lentzos, F.; Invernizzi, C.; Ekins, S. Dual use of artificial-intelligence-powered drug
discovery. Nature Machine Intelligence 2022, 4, 189–191.
[67] Urbina, F.; Lentzos, F.; Invernizzi, C.; Ekins, S. A teachable moment for dual-use.Nature machine
intelligence 2022, 4, 607–607.
[68] Campbell, Q. L.; Herington, J.; White, A. D. Censoring chemical data to mitigate dual use risk.
arXiv preprint arXiv:2304.10510 2023,
[69] Gao, L.; Schulman, J.; Hilton, J. Scaling Laws for Reward Model Overoptimization. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2210.10760 2022,
[70] Radford, A.; Narasimhan, K.; Salimans, T.; Sutskever, I., et al. Improving language understanding
by generative pre-training. 2018,
[71] Li, B.; Qi, P.; Liu, B.; Di, S.; Liu, J.; Pei, J.; Yi, J.; Zhou, B. Trustworthy AI: From Principles to
Practices. ACM Computing Surveys 2021, 55, 1 – 46.
15

---PAGE BREAK---

[Page 16]
[72] Hocky, G. M.; White, A. D. Natural language processing models that automate programming will
transform chemistry research and teaching. Digital Discovery 2022, 1, 79–83.
[73] Henderson, P.; Li, X.; Jurafsky, D.; Hashimoto, T.; Lemley, M. A.; Liang, P. Foundation Models and
Fair Use. arXiv preprint arXiv:2303.15715 2023,
[74] Askell, A.; Brundage, M.; Hadfield, G. The Role of Cooperation in Responsible AI Development.
2019.
[75] Neufville, R. d.; Baum, S. D. Collective action on artificial intelligence: A primer and review.
Technology in Society 2021, 66, 101649.
[76] Touvron, H.; Lavril, T.; Izacard, G.; Martinet, X.; Lachaux, M.-A.; Lacroix, T.; Rozière, B.;
Goyal, N.; Hambro, E.; Azhar, F.; Rodriguez, A.; Joulin, A.; Grave, E.; Lample, G. LLaMA: Open
and Efficient Foundation Language Models. 2023.
[77] Chiang, W.-L.; Li, Z.; Lin, Z.; Sheng, Y .; Wu, Z.; Zhang, H.; Zheng, L.; Zhuang, S.; Zhuang, Y .;
Gonzalez, J. E.; Stoica, I.; Xing, E. P. Vicuna: An Open-Source Chatbot Impressing GPT-4 with
90%* ChatGPT Quality. 2023; https://lmsys.org/blog/2023-03-30-vicuna/ .
[78] Mukherjee, S.; Mitra, A.; Jawahar, G.; Agarwal, S.; Palangi, H.; Awadallah, A. Orca: Progressive
Learning from Complex Explanation Traces of GPT-4. 2023.
[79] Chase, H. LangChain. 2022; https://github.com/hwchase17/langchain.
[80] Press, O.; Zhang, M.; Min, S.; Schmidt, L.; Smith, N. A.; Lewis, M. Measuring and Narrowing the
Compositionality Gap in Language Models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2210.03350 2022,
[81] SerpAPI, SerpAPI - Google Search Results API. 2023; https://serpapi.com/.
[82] Neelakantan, A.; Xu, T.; Puri, R.; Radford, A.; Han, J. M.; Tworek, J.; Yuan, Q.; Tezak, N.;
Kim, J. W.; Hallacy, C., et al. Text and code embeddings by contrastive pre-training.arXiv preprint
arXiv:2201.10005 2022,
[83] Johnson, J.; Douze, M.; Jégou, H. Billion-scale similarity search with GPUs. IEEE Transactions on
Big Data 2019, 7, 535–547.
[84] ChemSpace, ChemSpace - Provider of Chemical Building Blocks, Fragment Libraries, and Screen-
ing Compounds. https://chem-space.com/, 2023.
[85] National Center for Biotechnology Information, PubChem. https://pubchem.ncbi.nlm.nih.
gov/, 2023.
[86] Lowe, D. M.; Corbett, P. T.; Murray-Rust, P.; Glen, R. C. Chemical name to structure: OPSIN, an
open source solution. 2011.
[87] Medina, J.; White, A. D. Bloom filters for molecules. arXiv preprint arXiv:2304.05386 2023,
[88] Irwin, J. J.; Tang, K. G.; Young, J.; Dandarchuluun, C.; Wong, B. R.; Khurelbaatar, M.; Moroz, Y . S.;
Mayfield, J.; Sayle, R. A. ZINC20—a free ultralarge-scale chemical database for ligand discovery.
Journal of chemical information and modeling 2020, 60, 6065–6073.
[89] Chemical Abstracts Service, CAS Registry Number. https://www.cas.org/content/
cas-registry, Accessed: April 2023.
[90] TT, T. An elementary mathematical theory of classification and prediction; 1958.
[91] Rogers, D.; Hahn, M. Extended-connectivity fingerprints. Journal of chemical information and
modeling 2010, 50, 742–754.
[92] White, Andrew D, SynSpace. https://github.com/whitead/synspace, Accessed: April 2023;
GitHub repository.
[93] Wellawatte, G. P.; Seshadri, A.; White, A. D. Model agnostic generation of counterfactual explana-
tions for molecules. Chemical science 2022, 13, 3697–3705.
16

---PAGE BREAK---

[Page 17]
[94] MedChemComm. Accessed: 5 April 2023,
[95] Yang, Q.; Sresht, V .; Bolgar, P.; Hou, X.; Klug-McLeod, J. L.; Butler, C. R., et al. Molecular
transformer unifies reaction prediction and retrosynthesis across pharma chemical space. Chemical
communications 2019, 55, 12152–12155.
[96] Mcule, Purchasable Mcule. https://purchasable.mcule.com/, Accessed: April 2023.
[97] RDKit: Open-source cheminformatics. http://www.rdkit.org, [Online; accessed April 2023].
[98] Chemical Weapons Convention, Annex on Chemicals, B. Schedules of Chemicals.http://www.
opcw.org, Accessed: May 2023.
[99] Group, A. Export Control List: Chemical Weapons Precursors. https://australiagroup.net/
en/, Accessed: May 2023.
[100] NextMove Software, NameRxn. https://www.nextmovesoftware.com/namerxn.html, last
accessed 2020/11/07; Accessed: 5 April 2023.
[101] Carey, J. S.; Laffan, D.; Thomson, C.; Williams, M. T. Analysis of the reactions used for the
preparation of drug candidate molecules. Organic & biomolecular chemistry 2006, 4, 2337–2347.
[102] Vaucher, A. C.; Schwaller, P.; Geluykens, J.; Nair, V . H.; Iuliano, A.; Laino, T. Inferring experimental
procedures from text-based representations of chemical reactions. Nature Communications 2021,
12, 2573, Number: 1 Publisher: Nature Publishing Group.
[103] Edwards, C.; Lai, T.; Ros, K.; Honke, G.; Cho, K.; Ji, H. Translation between Molecules and Natural
Language. 2022.
[104] Christofidellis, D.; Giannone, G.; Born, J.; Winther, O.; Laino, T.; Manica, M. Unifying Molecular
and Textual Representations via Multi-task Language Modelling. arXiv preprint arXiv:2301.12586
2023,
[105] Azamfirei, R.; Kudchadkar, S. R.; Fackler, J. Large language models and the perils of their halluci-
nations. Critical Care 2023, 27, 1–2.
[106] Khapra, M. M.; Sai, A. B. A tutorial on evaluation metrics used in natural language generation.
2021, 15–19.
[107] Melis, G.; Dyer, C.; Blunsom, P. On the state of the art of evaluation in neural language models.
arXiv preprint arXiv:1707.05589 2017,
[108] Flam-Shepherd, D.; Zhu, K.; Aspuru-Guzik, A. Language models can learn complex molecular
distributions. Nature Communications 2022, 13, 3293.
17

---PAGE BREAK---

[Page 18]
A Experimental procedures
A.1 Insect repellent
Synthesis of N,N-Diethyl-m-toluamide (DEET)
A 100ml stainless-steel reactor inertized by vacuum and nitrogen flushing the reactor three times. To the
reactor diethylamine (0.3ml, 4.1mmol) and DCM (15ml) were added. A solution of 3-methylbenzoyl
chloride (3.2ml, 3.2mmol, 1M in DCM) was added and the mixture was stirred at 25°C for 60min. The
reaction mixture was extracted with water (15ml) and DCM (10ml). The organic layer was collected
and analyzed by taking a 0.3ml sample. The sample was diluted with acetonitrile 100 times, filtered and
injected into an HPLC/MS setup. MS (ES): m/z 192 [M+H] calculated, found 192.14 m/z.
A.2 Thiourea catalysts
Synthesis of the Schreiners’ catalyst:
1,3-Bis[3,5-bis(trifluoromethyl)phenyl]thiourea
A 100ml stainless-steel reactor inertized by vacuum and nitrogen flushing the reactor three times. To this
reactor a solution of 3,5-bis(trifluoromethyl)phenyl isothiocyanate (0.4ml, 4mmol, 1M in THF), and a
solution of 3,5-bis(trifluoromethyl)aniline (0.3ml, 3mmol, 1M in THF) were added. The mixture was
diluted with 14.3 ml of THF and stirred for 1h at 60°C. A 0.3ml sample of the reaction mixture was diluted
10x with acetonitrile (2.7ml), filtered and injected into an HPLC/MS setup. MS (ES): m/z 501 [M+H]
calculated, found 501.02 m/z.
Synthesis of Takemoto catalyst:
1-(3,5-Bis(trifluoromethyl)phenyl)-3-((1R,2R)-2-(dimethylamino)cyclohexyl)thiourea
A 100 mL stainless-steel reactor was inertized by vacuum and nitrogen flushing three times. To this reactor
a solution of trans-N,N-dimethylcyclohexane-1,2-diamine (0.3 ml, 3mmol, 1M in THF) was added and
diluted with 14.7 ml of THF before adding 0.5ml of a 3,5-bis(trifluoromethyl)phenyl isothiocyanate (0.5ml,
5mmol, 1M in THF). The reaction mixture was stirred for 24h at room temperature (25 °C). A 0. 3ml
sample of the reaction mixture was diluted (10x) with acetonitrile (2.7ml) and filtered, before injecting into
a HPLC/MS. MS(ES): m/z 413 [M+H] calculated, found 413.14 m/z.
Synthesis of the Ricci’s thiourea catalyst:
(1-(3,5-Bis(trifluoromethyl)phenyl)-3-((1R,2S)-2-hydroxy-2,3-dihydro-1H-inden-1-yl)thiourea)
To a three times with nitrogen and vacuum inertized 100ml stainless-steel reactor a glass ampule with
(1R,2S)-1-amino-2-indanol (1.5mmol, 223.8 mg) was added. The reactor was pressurized, which causes
the glass ampule to break then 15ml of THF were added to the reactor. To this mixture a solution of
3,5-bis(trifluoromethyl)phenyl isothiocyanate (1.5ml, 1.5mmol, 1M in THF) was added. The reaction
18

---PAGE BREAK---

[Page 19]
mixture was stirred for 24h at room temperature (25°C). A sample (0.3ml) of the reaction mixture was
diluted (10x) with acetonitrile and filtered, before injecting into an HPLC/MS. MS(ES): m/z 421 [M+H]
calculated, found 421.08 m/z.
A.3 Chromophore Synthesis
Step 1: N-(4’-vinyl-[1,1’-biphenyl]-3-yl)methanesulfonamide
To a round bottom flask 1-bromo-4-ethenylbenzene (170.2mg, 0.122ml 0.93mmol, 1 eq) was added
followed by [3-(methanesulfonamido)phenyl]boronic acid (200mg, 0.93mmol, 1eq), SPhosPd G2 (70mg,
0.09mmol, 0.1eq) and sodium carbonate (123mg, 1.63mmol, 1.25eq). To this flask 8ml acetonitrile and
2ml of water was added and the mixture was for 2h20min at 90°C. After letting the mixture cool down to
room temperature, 10ml of water was added and the mixture was extracted twice with Ethyl acetate (2x
15ml). The organic layers were combined and washed with 15ml of brine. The organic layer was dried
over Na2SO4. The mixture was concentrated and purified using a column chromatography (Silica column)
with a gradient of n-hexane: Ethyl acetate from 10% to 50%. The product N-(4’-vinyl-[1,1’-biphenyl]-3-
yl)methanesulfonamide was determined via MS(ESI) and NMR. HPLC-MS(ESI): R.T. 5.315 min. [M+H]
calculated 274.3573 m/z, found 274.0901 m/z [M+NH4] calculated 291.3839 m/z, found 291.1171 m/z 1H
NMR (80 MHz, Chloroform-d) δ 7.64 – 7.22 (m, 9H), 7.07 – 6.72 (m, 1H), 5.84 (d, J = 17.5 Hz, 1H), 5.34
(d, J = 10.8 Hz, 1H), 3.10 (s, 3H). 13C NMR (20 MHz, Chloroform-d) δ 140.59, 139.41, 138.40, 137.35,
136.45, 130.16, 127.27, 126.78, 124.09, 119.56, 119.18, 114.32, 43.14.
Step 2: (E)-3-methyl-4-(2-(3’-(methylsulfonamido)-[1,1’-biphenyl]-4-yl)vinyl)benzoate
N-(4’-vinyl-[1,1’-biphenyl]-3-yl)methanesulfonamide (60.1mg, 0.22mmol, 1eq) was added to a round
bottom flask and a mixture was formed by adding acetonitrile (2ml). Methyl 4-iodo-3-methyl-benzoate
(66mg, 0.23mmol, 1.08eq) was added, followed by an addition of palladium acetate (2.5mg 0.01mmol,
0.05eq) and triethylamine (217.8mg, 0.3ml, 2.15mmol 9.78 eq.). The mixture was refluxed for 4h
and cooled down. To the cool mixture 10ml of ethyl acetate was added and extracted with 2x10ml
of 1M aqueous HCL solution. The aqueous phase was washed with 10ml ethyl acetate. The organic
layers were combined washed with 20ml of Brine followed by drying with NaSO4. The mixture was
filtered and purified using column chromatography (Silica) with a gradient of n-hexane:ethyl acetate
from 30:70 to 50:50. The product methyl (E)-3-methyl-4-(2-(3’-(methylsulfonamido)-[1,1’-biphenyl]-
4-yl)vinyl)benzoate was determined via MS(ESI) and NMR. HPLC-MS(ESI): R.T. 6.031 min. [M+H]
calculated 422.5159 m/z, found 422.1418 m/z [M+NH4] calculated 439.5425m/z, found 439.1686 m/z
1H NMR (80 MHz, Chloroform-d) δ 8.02 – 7.29 (m, 13H), 6.55 (s, 1H), 4.02 (s, 3H), 3.16 (s, 3H), 2.59
(s, 3H). 13C NMR (20 MHz, Chloroform-d) δ 166.58, 139.89, 138.91, 137.84, 137.46, 136.20, 135.38,
131.73, 130.28, 130.12, 128.96, 127.56, 127.51, 127.45, 127.40, 126.48, 124.04, 120.91, 116.30, 53.23,
39.23, 19.96.
19

---PAGE BREAK---

[Page 20]
B Human evaluation
Human evaluation was carried out by a panel of four expert chemists. In order to facilitate their assessment
of the models’ performance, an evaluation sheet was prepared and provided. This sheet included the
answers given by each model for every task. Whenever a molecular structure or reaction ( IUPAC or
SMILES notation) was mentioned in the text, it was converted to the corresponding graph depiction using
the open-source IUPAC parsing tool OPSIN 15. Preparing this sheet proved a challenge, as some responses
from GPT-4 required significant human interpretation. An example response and its corresponding
interpretation is shown below and in Figure 6.
To synthesize Takemoto’s organocatalyst (1-[3,5-bis(trifluoromethyl)phenyl]-3-
[(1R,2R)-(-)-2-(dimethylamino)cyclohexyl]thioure a), we can follow a stepwise ap-
proach. Here is a possible synthetic route:
1. Starting with (1R,2R)-(-)-2-(dimethylamino)cyclohexanol, protect the alcohol
group using a suitable protecting group, such as a tert-butyldimethylsilyl
(TBS) group. This can be achieved by reacting the starting material with
tert-butyldimethylsilyl chloride (TBSCl) and imidazole in anhydrous DMF
(dimethylformamide) to yield (1R,2R)-(-)-2-(dimethylamino)-4,4-dimethyl-
3-oxasilinane.
2. Next, convert the amine group to an isothiocyanate group. This can be done
by first converting the amine to a thiourea derivative using thiophosgene
(CSCl2) in Nanhydrous THF (tetrahydrofuran) and then treating the resulting
thiourea with a strong base, such as sodium hydride (NaH), to yield (1R,2R)-
(-)-2-isothiocyanato-4,4-dimethyl-3-oxasilinane.
3. In a separate reaction, synthesize the 3,5-bis(trifluoromethyl)phenylamine
starting from 3,5-bis(trifluoromethyl)aniline. Protect the amine group using a
suitable protecting group, such as a Boc (tert-butoxycarbonyl) group. This can
be achieved by reacting the starting material with di-tert-butyl dicarbonate
(Boc2O) and a suitable base, such as triethylamine (Et3N), in anhydrous
dichloromethane (DCM) to yield N-Boc-3,5-bis(trifluoromethyl)aniline.
4. Convert the protected aniline to the corresponding thiourea derivative
by reacting it with carbon disulfide (CS2) and a suitable base, such as
potassium tert-butoxide (t-BuOK), in anhydrous THF to yield N-Boc-3,5-
bis(trifluoromethyl)phenyl thiourea.
5. Now, couple the two protected thiourea derivatives from steps 2 and 4.
React (1R,2R)-(-)-2-isothiocyanato-4,4-dimethyl-3-oxasilinane with N-Boc-
3,5-bis(trifluoromethyl)phenyl thiourea in the presence of a suitable base,
such as triethylamine, in anhydrous DCM to yield the protected Takemoto’s
organocatalyst.
6. Finally, deprotect the alcohol and amine groups. Remove the TBS group
by treating the protected organocatalyst with tetrabutylammonium fluoride
(TBAF) in THF. Then, remove the Boc group by treating the intermediate
with trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) in DCM. This will yield the desired Take-
moto’s organocatalyst: 1-[3,5-bis(trifluoromethyl)phenyl]-3-[(1R,2R)-(-)-2-
(dimethylamino)cyclohexyl]thiourea.
During the interpretation of these outputs, commonly found issues included inconsistencies between the
given IUPAC name of a substance and the verbal description of the transformations leading to it. Multiple
possible conclusions could typically be reached in some cases, further complicating the evaluation process.
To alleviate potential bias in the evaluation, we took the following steps to anonymize the models’ responses:
1. Randomly shuffling the order of presentation of the models (i.e., for a given task, ChemCrow’s answer
shown before or after GPT’s at random). 2. Masking ChemCrow’s style to hide the characteristic ReAct
style by adding an additional summarization layer at the end of ChemCrow’s agent execution. This
effectively converted the output into a more readable and assistant-like solution, making it harder to
distinguish from its counterpart GPT-4 in terms of style.
20

---PAGE BREAK---

[Page 21]
C Synthesis example: GPT-4 vs ChemCrow
Hallucination in LLMs is an issue that ChemCrow seeks to tackle through the addition of expert tools. Fig-
ure 6 displays the results from GPT-4 and ChemCrow on the task of synthesizing Takemoto’s organocatalyst,
a bifunctional organocatalyst that enables enantioselective Michael reactions of malonates to nitroolefins59.
The complete task is shown in Appendix G.14.
GPT-4 Synthesis ChemCrow Synthesis
Human evaluation
Step 1: Synthesis of isothiocyanate 1. Add 0.3 mmol of A
2. Add 0.2 mL of THF
3. Add 0.5 mmol of B
4. Stir at 25C for 24h.
5. Concentrate
6. Purify
Step 2: Synthesis of target
NHNH
S
F
F
F
F
F
F
N
NH N
S
F
F
F F
F
F
OTBS
NH
S
O O
1) TBAF, THF
2) TFA, DCM
N O
O
SH2N
F F
F
F
F
FTEA, DCM
NH O
O
F F
F
F
F
F
t-BuOK
DCM, CS2
OTBS
N
C
S
NH2
F F
F
F
F
F
(Boc)2OH, TEA, DCM
OTBS
N
C
S
TBSO
N
1) CSCl2, THF
2) NaH
HO
N TBSCl, DMF
N
NH
BA
GPT-4 Synthesis:
  Inaccurate IUPAC names, non parsable.
  Described reactions need interpretation.
  Incorrect route, not leading to product.
  Unnecessary protection.
  Potential loss of chirality in precursor.
ChemCrow synthesis:
  Standard procedure
  Provides quantities, conditions, 
  and reaction times. 
Target: Takemoto’s
organocatalyst
F F
F
F
F
F
N
C
S
NH2
N
F F
F
F
F
F
N
H
N
H
S
N
THF, 25°C
+
Figure 6: Expert analysis of models’ output. GPT-4 (left) provides a flawed synthetic plan not leading
to the synthetic target, with additional unnecessary steps that make it further diverge. ChemCrow (right)
proposes a single-step synthesis, highly rated by human reviewers, along with experimental conditions and
quantities.
As shown, the synthetic plan proposed by ChemCrow is a simple disconnection that leads to a isothiocyanate
and the chiral substituted cyclohexane to form the desired thiourea, providing experimental conditions
like solvent, temperature and reaction times alongside. GPT-4’s response proposes a long synthesis with a
series of unnecessary protection/deprotection sequences, uses unnecesary condensations making the route
diverge from the target, and proposes a disconnection that potentially risks the chiral center by using it to
place the thioisocyanate. Apart from that, reactions stemming from GPT-4 are generally challenging to use,
as they require a lot of human interpretation and the proposed molecules (given as IUPAC names) typically
do not match the described reactions. Regardless of this, EvaluatorGPT gives a higher grade to GPT-4,
argumenting that the model “addresses stereochemistry and protecting group strategies. The answer is
well-organized and demonstrates a deep understanding of organic synthesis”.
This highlights a clear limitation of the LLM-powered evaluation in the realm of synthetic chemistry, as it
relies heavily on how confident and fluent the response is, instead of how good the thought process is or
how accurate the solutions are. Additionally it shows how human evaluation is still very much needed for
the evaluation of these types of systems, specially in a fact-critical field like chemistry.
21

---PAGE BREAK---

[Page 22]
D Safety Workflow
Figure 7: These steps are followed every time the agent receives a prompt.
22

---PAGE BREAK---

[Page 23]
E Reproducibility
One of the most salient concerns regarding the integration of LLMs into scientific workflows is reproducibil-
ity, particularly when closed-source LLMs play key roles. To assess the reproducibility of ChemCrow
for solving reasoning tasks in chemistry, task 6 (see Appendix 14) was selected and five independent
executions of ChemCrow were carried out to solve it.
Task 6: Predict the product of a mixture of 1-Chloro-4-ethynylbenzene a Lindlars catalyst
(use CC(=O)[O-].CC(=O)[O-].[Pd].[Pb+2]). Predict the same reaction but replacing
the catalyst with "[Pd]". Finally, compare the two products and explain the reaction
mechanisms.
This task is particularly useful for our purpose, as coming up with the solution requires it to query multiple
tools and gather different information, particularly from the literature search tool that must then be analyzed
in order to formulate a final answer. Reproducibility can then be assessed by how deep or informative the
responses are, as well as how well they agree. Figure 8 displays the final results of the executions. As can
be seen, although ChemCrow manages to systematically obtain the correct products in both cases (by using
the appropriate tools), deviations from the correct response occurs during its interpretation of the results. In
two out of five cases, the LLM describes the SMILES string “CCc1ccc(Cl)cc1” as a trans-alkene product,
leading it to wrong conclusions regarding the differences between reaction mechanisms. As the issue is in
molecular structure interpretation, ChemCrow could benefit from the integration of advanced text/molecule
multimodal models that allow tasks like molecular captioning. Although recent approaches 103,104 tackle
this issue, further research is still needed towards human-level molecular captioning tools.
Pre d i c t  t h e  p ro d u c t  of  a  m i x t u re  of  1 - C h l o ro - 4 - e t hy ny l b e n ze n e  a  L i n d l a r s  c a t a lyst  ( u s e  CC ( = O ) [ O - ] .CC ( = O ) [ O - ] . [ Pd ] .
[ P b + 2 ] ) .  Pre d i c t  t h e  s a m e  re a c t i o n  b u t  re p l a c i n g  t h e  c a t a lyst  w i t h  " [ Pd ] ".  F i n a lly,  co m p a re  t h e  t wo  p ro d u c t s  a n d  ex p l a i n  
t h e  re a c t i o n  m e c h a n i s m s.
1
O u t p u t s
 Pr o d u c t  1
“a  c i s - a l ke n e”
 “a n  a l k a n e”
“a n  a l k a n e”
“a  t ra n s - a l ke n e”
“a  t ra n s - a l ke n e”
“a n  a l k a n e”
“a  c i s - a l ke n e”
“a  c i s - a l ke n e”
“a  c i s - a l ke n e”
“a  c i s - a l ke n e”
Pr o d u c t  2
 M o d e l’s  a n swe r
Lindlar's: Selectively reduces alkynes to cis-alkenes [...] 
forming a cis-alkene product.
Pd: More complete hydrogenation, reducing the alkyne 
all the way to an alkane.

Difference: Lindlar’s yields partial hydrogenation, Pd 
allows full hydrogenation.
Lindlar’s: Partial hydrogenation of the alkyne to form a 
cis-alkene.
Pd: The catalyst is not poisoned [...] resulting in the 
formation of an alkane.

Difference: Lindlar’s yields partial hydrogenation, Pd 
allows full hydrogenation.
Lindlar's: Selectively reduces alkynes to cis-alkenes, 
with the q uinoline component preventing complete 
reduction to the alkane.  
Pd: The Pd catalyst reduces the alkyne to the trans-
alkene.  

Difference: S tereoche m istry of the dou b le b ond.
Lindlar’s: Selectively reduces alkynes to cis-alkenes. 
The q uinoline component serves to prevent complete 
reduction to the alkane, ensuring that the product 
remains a cis-alkene.
Pd: R educes the alkyne to the trans-alkene.

Difference: S tereoche m istry of the dou b le b ond.
Lindlar's: Selective hydrogenation of the alkyne to form 
a cis-alkene.
Pd: Complete hydrogenation, resulting in an alkane 
product.  

Difference: Lindlar’s yields partial hydrogenation, Pd 
allows full hydrogenation.
2
3
4
5
Figure 8: Five outputs from separate instances of ChemCrow on the same task (summarized for clarity),
including products and comparisons given.
23

---PAGE BREAK---

[Page 24]
F Limitations
Despite the impressive performance of ChemCrow on a variety of tasks across different chemistry fields,
there are still significant limitations that need to be tackled for its dependable incorporation into routine
chemistry workflows. The most notable of these, that have also been discussed in recent publications105–108
regarding the applications of LLMs, are hallucination, difficulty of evaluating results, and reproducibility.
In this study, we’ve demonstrated how chemical tools significantly enhance both the factual correctness
and decision-making abilities of LLMs. Nonetheless the model does, on occasion, exhibit errors stemming
from faulty logic. Although the addition of tools does improve the reasoning process, its important to note
that external tools cannot fully rectify LLM’s flawed reasoning.
Challenges of evaluation are another prominent issue which hinders our ability to provide a solid, de-
pendable assessment of ChemCrow’s performance in distinct tasks and pinpoint precisely where it can
be reliably used. As our findings suggest, the existing LLM-based evaluation methods are insufficient
for thoroughly assessing ChemCrow’s performance because they lack the necessary knowledge to detect
errors and tend to favor more verbose and fluent-looking solutions. This forces us to rely heavily on human
evaluations, thus restricting the pace and scale at which performance can be measured. Moreover, the task
of designing experiments to display the strengths and weaknesses of LLM-based tools remains a challenge,
as it is field-specific and demands substantial expert human oversight.
Undeniably, the effectiveness of ChemCrow is also bound by the quality and quantity of the tools it
utilizes. For instance, the limitations of open-source retrosynthesis planning software can be seen in
various fronts like the data it uses, the algorithms it employs, and the existing challenges it faces in
evaluation. Consequently, it would be unreasonable to anticipate that ChemCrow could outperform
the retrosynthetic tools it uses, although it could enhance its performance through the integration of
different tools. Future improvements in the field of chemistry-specific Machine Learning could certainly
be advantageous to ChemCrow. This includes the development of superior tools, more advanced LLMs
with a deeper understanding of chemistry, and further progress in defining agent architecture.
G Tasks and Evaluation
Here are presented the set of 14 tasks ChemCrow was evaluated on, along with the results of the execution,
the results of a plain LLM (GPT-4) on the same tasks, and the evaluation results from an evaluator LLM
and from a committee of human experts.
24

---PAGE BREAK---

[Page 25]
G.1 Task 1 - Synthesis for Safinamide
Figure 9: Results for GPT-4 and ChemCrow performance on task 1. Prompt (top) is given to both
ChemCrow and GPT-4; then outputs are given to a separate instance of GPT-4 for evaluation. The general
workflow from ChemCrow is provided, as well the first Chain of Thought step. Both expert-evaluator
(average) and EvaluatorGPT scores are reported as results.
25

---PAGE BREAK---

[Page 26]
G.2 Task 2 - Propose New Organocatalyst
Figure 10: Results for GPT-4 and ChemCrow performance on task 2. Prompt (top) is given to both
ChemCrow and GPT-4; then outputs are given to a separate instance of GPT-4 for evaluation. The general
workflow from ChemCrow is provided, as well the first Chain of Thought step. Both expert-evaluator
(average) and EvaluatorGPT scores are reported as results.
26

---PAGE BREAK---

[Page 27]
G.3 Task 3 - Explain Mechanisms
Figure 11: Results for GPT-4 and ChemCrow performance on task 3. Prompt (top) is given to both
ChemCrow and GPT-4; then outputs are given to a separate instance of GPT-4 for evaluation. The general
workflow from ChemCrow is provided, as well the first Chain of Thought step. Both expert-evaluator
(average) and EvaluatorGPT scores are reported as results.
27

---PAGE BREAK---

[Page 28]
G.4 Task 4 - Synthesize Insect Repellent
Figure 12: GPT-4 evaluator results for GPT-4 and ChemCrow performance on task 4. Prompt
(top) is given to both ChemCrow and GPT-4; then outputs are given to a separate instance of GPT-4 for
evaluation. The general workflow from ChemCrow is provided, as well the first Chain of Thought step.
Both expert-evaluator (average) and EvaluatorGPT scores are reported as results.
28

---PAGE BREAK---

[Page 29]
G.5 Task 5 - How to Make Target
Figure 13: Results for GPT-4 and ChemCrow performance on task 5. Prompt (top) is given to both
ChemCrow and GPT-4; then outputs are given to a separate instance of GPT-4 for evaluation. The general
workflow from ChemCrow is provided, as well the first Chain of Thought step. Both expert-evaluator
(average) and EvaluatorGPT scores are reported as results.
29

---PAGE BREAK---

[Page 30]
G.6 Task 6 - Compare Catalyst Mechanisms
Figure 14: Results for GPT-4 and ChemCrow performance on task 6. Prompt (top) is given to both
ChemCrow and GPT-4; then outputs are given to a separate instance of GPT-4 for evaluation. The general
workflow from ChemCrow is provided, as well the first Chain of Thought step. Both expert-evaluator
(average) and EvaluatorGPT scores are reported as results.
30

---PAGE BREAK---

[Page 31]
G.7 Task 7 - Synthesize Similar Molecule
Figure 15: Results for GPT-4 and ChemCrow performance on task 7. Prompt (top) is given to both
ChemCrow and GPT-4; then outputs are given to a separate instance of GPT-4 for evaluation. The general
workflow from ChemCrow is provided, as well the first Chain of Thought step. Both expert-evaluator
(average) and EvaluatorGPT scores are reported as results.
31

---PAGE BREAK---

[Page 32]
G.8 Task 8 - Synthesis Planning of Riccis’s Organocatalyst
Figure 16: Results for GPT-4 and ChemCrow performance on task 8. Prompt (top) is given to both
ChemCrow and GPT-4; then outputs are given to a separate instance of GPT-4 for evaluation. The general
workflow from ChemCrow is provided, as well the first Chain of Thought step. Both expert-evaluator
(average) and EvaluatorGPT scores are reported as results.
32

---PAGE BREAK---

[Page 33]
G.9 Task 9 - Predict Success of Reaction
Figure 17: Results for GPT-4 and ChemCrow performance on task 9. Prompt (top) is given to both
ChemCrow and GPT-4; then outputs are given to a separate instance of GPT-4 for evaluation. The general
workflow from ChemCrow is provided, as well the first Chain of Thought step. Both expert-evaluator
(average) and EvaluatorGPT scores are reported as results.
33

---PAGE BREAK---

[Page 34]
G.10 Task 10 - Property of Reaction Product
Figure 18: Results for GPT-4 and ChemCrow performance on task 10.Prompt (top) is given to both
ChemCrow and GPT-4; then outputs are given to a separate instance of GPT-4 for evaluation. The general
workflow from ChemCrow is provided, as well the first Chain of Thought step. Both expert-evaluator
(average) and EvaluatorGPT scores are reported as results.
34

---PAGE BREAK---

[Page 35]
G.11 Task 11 - Similar Molecule to Nitroglycerin
Figure 19: GPT-4 evaluator results for GPT-4 and ChemCrow performance on task 11. Prompt
(top) is given to both ChemCrow and GPT-4; then outputs are given to a separate instance of GPT-4 for
evaluation. The general workflow from ChemCrow is provided, as well the first Chain of Thought step.
Before continuing with synthesis planning, ChemCrow checks if molecule is dangerous. Upon finding
molecule is explosive, execution stops with warning. For this example, no scores are provided, as execution
stops.
35

---PAGE BREAK---

[Page 36]
G.12 Task 12 - Synthesis and Cost of Atorvastatin
Figure 20: Results for GPT-4 and ChemCrow performance on task 11.Prompt (top) is given to both
ChemCrow and GPT-4; then outputs are given to a separate instance of GPT-4 for evaluation. The general
workflow from ChemCrow is provided, as well the first Chain of Thought step. Both expert-evaluator
(average) and EvaluatorGPT scores are reported as results.
36

---PAGE BREAK---

[Page 37]
G.13 Task 13 - Synthesis of Aspirin
Figure 21: Results for GPT-4 and ChemCrow performance on task 13.Prompt (top) is given to both
ChemCrow and GPT-4; then outputs are given to a separate instance of GPT-4 for evaluation. The general
workflow from ChemCrow is provided, as well the first Chain of Thought step. Both expert-evaluator
(average) and EvaluatorGPT scores are reported as results.
37

---PAGE BREAK---

[Page 38]
G.14 Task 14 - Synthesis of Takemoto’s Organocatalyst
Figure 22: Results for GPT-4 and ChemCrow performance on task 14.Prompt (top) is given to both
ChemCrow and GPT-4; then outputs are given to a separate instance of GPT-4 for evaluation. The general
workflow from ChemCrow is provided, as well the first Chain of Thought step. Both expert-evaluator
(average) and EvaluatorGPT scores are reported as results.
38